= Fyah fi 
r j pi ih 

1 i 
| aih . 
b i ' As 
l , | | i i A 


f k) a Fi i t. : W 
“i : f Mi q 


rt a Z 


E 


À supplemer for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game 


| 


=-— 


CREATURES OF THE GALAXY 


Inspired by the artists of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game 


he wt 
anit ie 
UDI gaze 
a pe, Me 
A 


D 
v A í 


Interior Art: Tim Bobko, Tom ONeill, David Plunkett, Dan 
Schaefer, Pete Venters, Mike Vilardi 
Design: Phil Brucato, Bill Smith, Rick D. Stuart, Chuck Truett 
Development and Editing: Bill Smith 
Graphics: Brian Schomburg 
Cover Design: Stephen Crane * Cover Art: Lucasfilm Ltd, 
Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter * Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter 
Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran * Senior Editor: Greg Farshtey 
Editors: Peter Schweighofer, Bill Smith, Ed Stark + Art Director: Stephen Crane 
Graphic Artists: Tim Bobko, Tom ONeill, Brian Schomburg * Sales Manager: Bill Olmesdahl 


Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden + Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill + Accounting: Karen Bayly, 
Wendy Lord, Kimberly Riccio * Billing: Amy Giacobbe 


Published by 


Vets 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40080 


B TM and © 1994 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL), Al) Rights Reserved, Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Ee introduction 


A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away ... 

Creatures ... 

The very word conjures images of exotic 
tauntauns, behemoth space slugs and deadly 
rancors. Inthe Star Wars movies we have encoun- 
tered creations from our wildest dreams and 
darkest nightmares. 

Creatures of the Galaxy provides more cre- 
ations from that universe. In all, over 50 new 
creatures are introduced, with complete descrip- 
tions of their appearance, behavior, habitat, and, 
of course, complete game statistics for use in the 
roleplaying game. 

The usefulness of creatures in the Star Wars 
roleplaying game is often overlooked. They are 
more than opponents for combat. Each animal is 
unique; while some will forever remain danger- 
ous predators, many can be trained as guard 
beasts. Some animals make loyal companions 
and pets, while others are beasts of burden for 
primitive cultures (or characters stranded far 
from the tools they tend to depend on). One 
cannot overlook the use of animals for food, 


AR. 
ARS 


y 


hides, and chemicals with medicinal, manufac- 
turing or industrial applications. 

Each animal description is written to illustrate 
theadventure possibilities revolving around each 
animal. Gamemasters should have no problems 
finding suitable new beasties to drop into their 
Star Wars roleplaying adventures. 


The Genesis of Creatures of the 
Galaxy 


Creatures of the Galaxy is an experiment for 
West End Games. Traditionally, the authors will 
write a manuscript and then artists are solicited 
to do specific illustrations to match the manu- 
script. In the case of Creatures of the Galaxy, West 
End approached its artists and simply told them, 
“Come up with some neat-looking creatures, jot 
down a few notes and then we'll turn the whole 
thing over to our writers.” The result was a book 
with a wide range of exotic-looking critters — 
we're pleased with how things turned out and we 
hope you are too! 


Creatures in the Roleplaying Game 


All creatures in Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition have a number of game 
statistics used to describe them. They are 
listed as follows. 

Type: A quick summary and classification 
of the creature. 

Attributes and Skills: Non-intelligent crea- 
tures have only Dexterity, Perception and 
Strength attributes. Some creatures have ap- 
propriate skills, such as brawling, climbing/ 
jumping or swimming. 

Creatures use their Strength or brawling 
skill to hit in combat, as well as their Strength 
to determine damage (some creatures have 
claws and teeth which can do extra damage, 
as listed under “Special Abilities.” 

Special Abilities: If the creature has any 
special abilities or natural tools that help it 


(such as claws, or armor, or the ability to 
breathe water and air, for example), this abil- 
ity or natural tool will be listed here. 

Move: The average move for the creature 
(listing is for meters per move). 

Size: A common size range for adult speci- 
mens of the creature. 

Scale: Normally creatures will be “crea- 
ture” scale (which is the same as “character” 
scale). If the scale is different than “creature,” 
it will be listed here. If there is no scale listing, 
it is assumed that the creature is creature 
scale. 

Orneriness: If the creature can be ridden, 
an orneriness will be listed. This is rolled 
against the rider's beast riding skill to see if the 
rider can maintain control of the creature in 
dangerous situations. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


e~> . 


zi. 


a ae 


— E 


NN T AR Introductie 


—WAR 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


An excerpt from promotional literature for the famed Tagge Holographic Museum of Chandrila. 


Dear Visitor: 

Welcome to the Tagge Holographic Museum and 
thank you for your patronage. We hope that your 
visit will be educational and entertaining! 

As you tour our various holographic exhibits, we 
encourage you to think of the incredible diversity of 
life to be found throughout the galaxy. If there is one 
thing that all xenobiologists have learned it is that 
life is tenacious, with a will to survive and, given a 
chance, thrive. 

Life-forms do not exist in a vacuum — each comes 
from an ecology, with other plants and animals as 
part of that ecology. Each world that gives rise to one 
species has often given rise to thousands of others as 
well. 

This exhibit introduces you to some of the more 
diverse and interesting life-forms found across the 
thousand-thousand worlds of the great and glorious 
Empire! 

While we have made every attempt to make your 
visit comfortable and informative, remember that 
the security offered by these holographic exhibits 
insulates you from the true struggle for survival in 
nature. Encountered in the wild, many of the animals 
featured here would prove incredibly dangerous! 

Some of the animals here are unique to their 
world of origin, but thousands of years ofinterstellar 
civilization has helped spread many animal species 
across countless worlds. 

We at the Tagge Holographic Museumare proud to 
offer your our tour, but remind you that what you will 
see herein is just a sample of the life-forms of the 
galaxy. For each animal shown, countless millions of 
species have been excluded from the exhibit. 

Each exhibit’s accompanying datafile describes 
the animal in general terms; more detailed refer- 
ences are available at most public or university 
libraries. 

The reader should bear in mind one general prin- 
ciple: evolution takes many different forms on differ- 
ent worlds. Often, xenobiologists encounter crea- 
tures which are “impossible” according to the vari- 
ous theories of evolution, but nonetheless the ani- 
mals do indeed exist. On some planets, life-forms will 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


“cross” characteristics normally associated with spe- 
cific animal classes. Because evolution can take so 
many different courses, xenobiologists have encoun- 
tered animals which have feathers, bear live young 
and are cold-blooded, for example. In other words, 
the only true “law” of evolution is that countless 
alien environments leads to countless different paths 
of evolution. 


Cover to this Holobrochure: The wort, a small 
predator from the desert wastes of the distant world 
of Tatooine! A mindless animal known to attack the 
diminutive Jawas of the world, this creature is out- 
side an unidentified estate waiting patiently for a 
meal to crawl, wiggle or hop by. 
— Holo courtesty Tatooine Visitors Bureau, 
Tatooine, Arkanis Sector, Outer Rim Territories 


= \/orrt 
Type: Voracious insipient predator 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION +2 
STRENGTH 1D 
Brawling: tongue attack 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Tongue Attack: The worrt willattack anything that moves 
that is its size or smaller. The tongue does 1D damage. 
Move: 3 
Size: ().5-1.5 meters tall 
Capsule: The worrt is a blindingly stupid, and 
harmless (to Humans) predator that inhabits the 
furthest wilderness areas of Tatooine. It will at- 
tack anything that even remotely appears edible, 
including metal, plants, large rocks that appear 
similar to other creatures and just about anything 
else that passes in front of it or that it can ap- 
proach without being attacked first. 

The worrt typically feeds on insects, small 
rodents and other tiny creatures native to Tatoo- 
ine. However, it will often harass larger creatures, 
especially if they don’t fight back. Jabba the Hutt 
has several as rather obnoxious pets around his 
palace, and they are found throughout the 
stretches surrounding the palace. 


Adar-Attack Stohl 


Adar 


Life-forms must continually adjust to condi- 
tions in their habitat; one species which clearly 
shows this are the adars of Omiddelon Ill. 
Omiddelon JI] orbits a very bright and hot star, 
subjecting the world to intense light, heat and 
radiation. In addition, the planet itself is oriented 
so that its poles are parallel to the orbital plane, 
instead of nearly perpendicular, as is the norm 
for many worlds that are considered “comfort- 
able.” The result is a world that is incredibly 
hostile to Humans, where areas are subjected to 
a period of blistering, devastating heat, followed 
by a “mild” season, then a period of dangerously 
frigid cold weather, followed by another brief 
mild season. 

The challenges of surviving in such an envi- 
ronment are formidable; many animals and plants 
are unable to survive in the extremes of the heat 
and cold, and thus are very active during the 
milder seasons, while going into hibernation for 
the extreme seasons. The adars fit this descrip- 
tion, and have proven themselves to be the domi- 
nant predators on their world — and unfortu- 
nately for many other species, on other worlds as 
well. 

Adars are long, reptilian-appearing creatures, 
with Jong tails, huge clawed forelimbs, hooked 
rearlimbs and large membranous wings on their 
backs. They are limited to activity between the 


AR 


ARS 


E Adar—Attack Stohi 


temperature ranges of 
the milder seasons of 
their homeworld — between - 
30 degrees and 90 degrees. 
Adars move by using their rearlimbs to 
propel them through the air with great leaps, 
while their wings help them glide on air cur- 
rents. Their forelimbs help them scamper 
through obstructed areas, suchas forests, jungles 
and swamps, and their tails help them maintain 
their balance for all movement. 

They have an extremely high metabolism, us- 
ing an immense amount of energy during their 
active cycles: they must consume their full weight 
every day to match their energy use. However, 
they are well adapted to environments where 
food is scarce — their tails can store excess 
energy and water. Also, when adars must begin 
drawing on stored energy, part of the conversion 
process releases an enzyme which eventually 
induces a mild “trance” (once the stored energy 
is almost entirely consumed). The adar will greatly 
slow its breathing and energy use, remaining 
motionless, until it can detect aready food source 
nearby. Adars in appropriately sheltered areas 
can survive for upwards of eight standard months 
while in this state. 

Adars are also incredibly adaptive in that they 
can evolve to metabolize virtually any food 
source. While they prefer the proteins of living 
beings, they can eat plants, and in some Cases, 
have adapted to draw sustenance from wood, 
rock and minerals. This adaptive process can 
take several months (the greater the difference 
from traditional food sources, the longer the 
adaptive process), and adars so adapted have a 
greatly reduced life span. 

Adars have become a serious hazard on the 
few worlds they have accidently been trans- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


l a aasam 


-WA 


planted to. Because of their adaptive metabo- 
lisms, they can thrive in rural areas, densely- 
packed urban areas, and virtually anywhere else 
food is available. Packs of roaming adars have 
been reported everywhere from subterranean 
city waste systems to space stations to isolated 
farms and ranches. Adars will not hesitate to 
attack Humans, large grazing animals and just 
about anything else that might be edible, and 
their cunning battle tactics make them danger- 
ous opponents, especially at short range. 

Adars typically hunt in packs, ranging any- 
where from four to over three dozen members. 
The adars separate, using their wings to cover a 
vast amount of area. However, once food is lo- 
cated, asingle adar will release a piercing scream, 
which will summon the other members of the 
pack. The adars will circle their prey, using a 
series of leaping or “dive-bombing” attacks, often 
with several adars launching simultaneous at- 
tacks from different angles. Needless to say, most 
targets don’t stand a chance when confronted by 
adars. 


m Adar 
Type: Adaptive carnivore 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search: tracking 3D+2 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 6D, climbing/jumping 6D, flight 6D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Claws: Do STR+2D damage 
Wings: Enable adars to fly 
Leaping Attack: Does STR+3D damage 
Adaptive: Adars can eat virtually anything to get nourish- 
ment 
Move: 13 (running), 15 (leaping), 22 (flying, but limited to 
five minutes every hour) 
Size: Up to 2.5 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Bill Smith 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


Altagak 


A particularly lethal mass of destruction, the 
altagak has been described by natives of the 
planet Altora as “high speed death on four legs.” 
This description accurately depicts the favorite 
pastime of this reptilian predator indigenous to 
Altora’s southern savannahs. 

A solitary hunter, the altagak enjoys the 
warmth of the planet's southern clime, often 
spending a good portion of each day basking in 
the sun, until aroused by the prospect of prey. 
Altagaks typically hunt a variety of large herd 
animals native to the southern plains, but they 
are not above attacking warm-blooded Human- 
oids if game is scarce. 

Once catching sight of a potential meal, the 
altagak becomes a patient hunter capable of 
slowly stalking its quarry for hours on end. Using 
the cover of the tall savannah grasses to mask its 
approach, the altagak will carefully approach to 
within a hundred meters of its unsuspecting 
quarry before initiating a sudden burst of speed 
to rapidly close the distance before the victim 
can react. During such attack lunges, altagaks 
have been clocked at over 80 kilometers an hour. 

The altagak uses the impetus of its momentum 
to deliver an attack in the form of a skewering 
head butt, impaling the victim on its long tusks. 
The shock of this initial impact is often enough to 
bring the quarry to the ground. Thereafter, the 
altagak’s sinuous snout retracts allowing several 
sets of rending teeth to make short work of its 
latest meal. 

Lacking few predators on Altora, the average 
altagak lifespan is estimated in excess of 28 years. 
This fact, and the voracious appetite of the aver- 
age altagak, has resulted in large bounties being 
placed on altgak hides in recent years. Despite 
this, altagak depredations on rancher herds are 


JA 


/ 


y 4 a i} 
F Wi I, H 1] lt 


a continuing problem that threatens the fragile 
economy of the planet. Altagaks have spread to 
other worlds, and while they are not as much of 
a threat, they are still feared predators. 


w Altagak 
Type: Solitary carnivore 
DEXTERITY 4D+2 
Running 6D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Claws: Foot claws do STR+2 damage. 
Silent Movement: A\tagak can move very silently, Add +1D 
to any sneak rolls when stalking prey. 
Speed: When initiating an attack altagak can produce 
spurts of high acceleration, maintaining this high speed 
for up to eight rounds. 
Threatening Display: To discourage competitors when 
feeding or nesting, altagak adults expand their spinal 
mane, making them appear to be much larger than they 
really are. 
Tail: Spiny tail does STR+1 damage in tailswipe. 
Teeth: Large, rending teeth do STR+1D damage. 
Tusks: Commonly used to skewer prey during on-rushing 
head butt, tusks do STR+2D damage. 
Move: 8 (walking), 28 (attack sprint) 
Size: 1.8-2.2 meters long 


illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Andoan Mineral-Fish 


Andoan mineral-fish are native to Ando, the 
home planet of the war-like Aqualish (see Galaxy 
Guide 4: Alien Races, Second Edition, pages 13- 
14). They were once plentiful in the rich seas of 
their world, but they became a prime commodity 
in the wars between the two Aqualish races and 
their populations dwindled. Only after the Re- 
public became guardian of Ando did the popula- 


Se ee eee 


ARS 


tion return to pre-war levels, but the Empire has 
once again begun harvesting the animals. 

Mineral-fish are shellfish that form hard outer 
shells composed of incredibly valuable metals and 
alloys. They have an extremely high metabolism 
and produce a great deal of heat. What makes them 
valuable is that they survive solely on minerals and 
metals. Their digestive system filters the various 
metals and ores — harvested mineral-fish contain 
rich deposits of valuable metals and ores within 
their shells and internal organs. 

The Aqualish used mineral-fish as a cheap 
means of harvesting metals vital to their war 
efforts. As the Empire and the Rebellion compete 
for resources, the rare alloys they produce are 
critically important to the war effort. One of the 
alloys found in their shells is purified sedrellium, 
an expensive high-strength alloy used to rein- 
force the hull of the Alliance’s X-wing fighter. 

Mineral-fish are found in large schools near 
rich deposits of minerals; in fact, Aqualish under- 
sea mining expeditions follow mineral-fish to 
determine where to establish new mines. Great 
fishing platforms prowl the seas of Ando looking 
for mineral-fish schools to harvest. 

Andoan mineral-fish are normally about half a 
meter long and are covered by a thick shell. They 
havea sharp spiked tail which is used to break up 
large rocks, but can also be deadly when used to 
defend against predators. They also have a num- 
ber of shelled fins used for propulsion and to 
break rocks down into edible chunks; while sel- 
dom used in combat, the fins are rough and 
abrasive and can cause serious injury to anyone 
who brushes them. Because of their fins and 
incredible strength, Aqualish harvesting mineral- 
fish wait several hours for the fish to “suffocate” 
in the air before daring to extract the minerals 
from the fish. 

They have a lifespan of three to five years, 
reaching full maturity after about one and a half 
years. Adult females can lay eggs about once every 
five months, producing hundreds of small, hard- 
shelled eggs which appear similar to ball bearings. 
Females build nests in calm, shallow pools near the 
coasts, as fewer natural predators prowl those 
waters. These waters are patrolled by Imperial 
skiffs to prevent Aqualish from harvesting imma- 
ture mineral-fish, but the Empire allows unlimited 
harvesting of mature mineral-fish. 

Experiments with controlled breeding of 
Andoan mineral-fish have been a complete fail- 
ure. Andoan mineral-fish placed in controlled 
environments do not survive more than two to 
three standard months and there are no recorded 
cases of eggs hatching while in captivity. 

There has been extensive research into their 
bio-chemical processing ability, but scientists 
have not been able to artificially duplicate it. A 
number of mining firms have invested in this 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


-WA 


Adar-Attack Stohl 


Courier’s Deal 


The Aqualish named Myinyar waited in the el- 
evated speeder lot, watching the minutes tick away on 
the speeder’s chrono. A salty breeze was blowing in 
off the ocean, carrying with it the strong odor of 
sulfur. The source, Ando Fishing Platform Yinn-x34, 
was barely visible. As the sun dipped below the 
horizon, the orange flames shooting from the mineral 
smelter stacks bathed the night sky, lending an eerie 
twilight to the cityscape. A pair of TIE fighters eased 
out over the ocean as part of their regular patrol of the 
bay. 

Myinyar fidgeted in her seat, once again checking 
the chrono, Her contact was supposed to be here in 
two minutes, and the sooner the deal was done, the 
sooner she would be able to get home to the Quara 
section of the city. She hadn't liked this deal from the 
start, but the credits were good ... too good. All she 
needed to do was give the woman the sedrellium, get 
the money, and then be on her way. 

She watched the crowd, looking for the tell-tale red 
scarf that would mark her customer. An odd mixture 
of Humans, Sullustans and Aquala Aqualish milled 
about; as the only Quara, or “fingered,” Aqualish here, 
she was obviously an outsider. Staying in the speeder 
would make it easier for her to make sure no one 
recognized her as a Quara. 

Finally, the Human with the scarf emerged from the 
turbolift. She was an adult female, with thick cosmetic 
paints on her lips and near her eyes. She had yellow hair. 
While she looked harmless enough, the Aqualish had 
long ago learned that no Human was ever harmless. 

The Human walked directly to the speeder and 
Myinyar slowly lowered the windowscreen. Myinyar 
muttered in Aqualish, “Get in.” 

The Human eased into the passenger seat. Myinyar 
watched her body language and noticed signs of 
apprehension. Weak. All Humans look weak, like this 
one. 


“Human, you have the credits?” 

The woman bared her teeth, something her fellow 
Humans called a “smile.” She spoke in Basic, the 
Humans’ language. “I do. You have the sedrellium? 
Three kilos?” 

Myinyar reached behind the seat and pulled out a 
small satchel. “It’s here.” 

The Human handed the Aqualish the credit stick. 
Myinmar caught movement out of the corner of her 
eye: three Humans, all dressed in identical suits. They 
were approaching the speeder quickly and deliber- 
ately. Glancing over, the woman inhaled sharply. 
“Those men .,. they must be ISB agents, Get going.” 

Myinmar snorted and shoved the woman. “Out!” 

The woman reached to her side and pulled out a 
hold-out blaster. “We don’t have time for this. Get 
moving or we'll both end up in an interrogation cen- 
ter.” 

Myinmar considered and then pushed the throttle 
lever. The repulsorlift generator screamed as the 
motor pushed the speeder from its parking spot and 
down the exit lane. The three Humans reached under 
their coats, pulling out blaster pistols. Myinmar raced 
down the ramp and rounded the corner before they 
could get off a clear shot. 

As Myinmar guided the speeder to street level, she 
stared at the woman. “Why are you so important to 
them?” 

The Human sat back into the cushion, “I'm some- 
one who the Empire needs to stop very badly ... 
someone who hates the Empire as much as you do. 
Follow my directions and | have friends who can help 
you to safety.” 

Myinmar eased the speeder through heavy traffic, 
heading toward the edge of the city. “I'll listen for 
now. But don’t mistake need for ... alliance. Now, 
where do we go?” 


research in the hopes that a cost-effective artifi- 
cial filtering process could be discovered. 


m Andoan Mineral-Fish 
Type: Mineral-consuming shellfish 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Special Abilities: 
Tail: Does STR+2D damage. 
Fins: Do STR+1 damage. 
Shell: Adds+1D to Strength to resist damage. 
Mineral Sense: Mineral-fish can sense large concentra- 
tions of minerals and metals, which they feed on. If a 
school is encountered feeding, the area is rich in valuable 
metals and minerals. 
Move: 8 
Size: Up to 1 meter long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Bill Smith 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


Arqet 

One of the most ferocious of all warm-blooded 
predators in the Agarix sector, the arqet is a 
murderous predator inhabiting the mountain 
ranges of the planet Pellastrallas. A solitary 
hunter, arqets feed off of various smaller animals 
such as the Ixzinian rock ram and the Uthori 
breix that inhabit the region. 

The arqet combines sure-footedness, numer- 
ous dense plates of rigid hide, and piercing, 
sharp teeth for a bundle of rampaging death. Yet 
for all this power, the arget survives mainly by its 
ability to remain hidden until the very last minute. 
Arqet patience is legendary. In the presence of a 
potential victim an arget is capable of remaining 
immobile — to all appearance virtually rock-like 
— until its prey is within range, at which point it 


EE The Arcet. 


attacks by skewering the unfortunate victim on 
its horns. 

Even in the presence of armed Humanoids, 
arquets have been known to take damage from 
energy and slug-throwing weapons without flinch- 
ing in hopes of dissuading its attackers or to lure 
the confused assailant in closer for a last, desper- 
ate lunge. 


m Arget 
Type: Mountain carnivore 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Special Abilities: 
Armor: The Arqet's dorsal and spinal plates give +2D 
verses physical and energy attacks. 
Camouflage: Arqet skin varies in hue according to the 
amount of solar radiation received. This allows it to blend 
in with its rocky surroundings with considerable ease. 
This is accounted for in the animal's sneak. 
Claws: Hoof claws do STR+2 damage. 
Feigned Immobility: Arqets are extremely patient preda- 
tors, capable of remaining absolutely motionless so as to 
draw to point blank range before attacking. 
Horns: The arget's curved horns do STR+2D damage. 
Teeth: The arget's teeth do STR+1D damage. 
Move: 9 walking, 12 (charging) 
Size: 1.8-2.4 meters long, up to 2 meters tall at the shoul- 
der 
Scale: Creature 


INustration & Concept: Tom ONeill/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Adar-Attack Stohl ee), | = 
ee 


ARS 


Attack Stohl 


These luxury pets with a nasty attitude come 
from Ichtor 8, where Imperial settlers carved out 
a series of resorts for the ultra-rich. This ice 
world, blessed with gorgeous scenery and plen- 
tiful natural resources, quickly became a social 
hub for rich travelers from the Core Worlds, who 
take long (and very expensive) vacations among 
the towering peaks. 

Stohls were first regarded as anuisance, albeit 
an attractive one. Their soft pelts and innate 
curiosity made them a hunters’ favorite. As the 
stohls could not move quickly, they became easy 
prey for blaster-armed sportsmen. Shantee Ren, 
a popular holovid star, protested the carnage 
and even adopted three stohls as pets. With 
treats and loving care, she domesticated the 
serpentine beasts and even took to wearing them 
around her neck for public appearances. When 
an overzealous fan grabbed Shantee’s arm dur- 
ing an autograph signing, the stohl soundly bit 
the admirer. Shantee weathered the public rela- 
tions storm by remarking that “Needla (the stoh!) 
has been specially trained to protect me. If not 
for her, [might have been killed. Who knows what 
that young man would've done if it hadn't been 
for Needla?” She than mounted a campaign to 
have the stohl declared an endangered species. 
With atremendous publicity push and numerous 
personal appearances, Shantee won the support 
ofanimal activists, politicians and fans. The stohl 
was saved from extinction and the star’s career 
received a healthy boost. 

Following Shantee’s lead, many celebrities 
demanded stohls of their own. The mar- 
ket for live stohls —and stohl trainers 
— boomed. Within less than a stan- 
dard year, stohl killing went 
from common to 
criminal. Now 
the beasts — 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—ITA 
-WA 


somewhat rare and quite expensive — grace the 
shoulders of thousands of ultra-rich star-travel- 
lers. 

In its natural habitat, the stohl is a hideaway, 
living in crevasses and feeding on small rodent- 
like smarls. Its natural curiosity leads the stohl 
from its den when new and interesting beings 
approach. According to accounts dating from 
the planet’s first settling, dozens of stohls 
emerged from hiding to examine the settlers’ 
crafts and dwellings. The creatures’ initial reac- 
tion to spacefaring visitors was friendly; numer- 
ous accounts describe stohls wrapping them- 
selves around an explorer’s arm and purring, or 
driving away the plague-ridden illorts (now be- 
lieved extinct) that threatened the first colonies 
with a contagious virus. 

Other accounts, however, depict the visiting 
stohls as scavengers with a nasty taste for table 
scraps, pets and small children. Shantee’s “Save 
the Stohl” campaign claimed that such tales were 
fabricated to justify hunting the beasts, but some 
of the darker reports do have the ring of truth. 

Sadly, the beautiful stohl pelt nearly proved 
the species’ undoing; within five years, stohls 
had learned to fear Human contact. Docile stohls 
could be found only around virgin land, and 
hunting them for any reason became difficult. 
Shantee’s agent claimed that Needla and Shen, 
two of the starlet’s pets, had approached her of 
their own volition while Shantee turbo-skied on 
the slopes of Mount Quavaar. The trapper who 
claims to have sold her the pair tells a different 
story. In any case, stohls became hard to find. 
Their burrows, tunneled into ice or hard-packed 
snow, remain notoriously difficult to locate. 

Stohls average about a meter to a meter and a 
half in length; they travel through the snow by 
undulating on their lightly-furred bellies. Their 
heavier top coats protect them from cold weather. 
Despite their propensity for thin caves and fis- 
sures, stohls do not dig their tunnels themselves; 
their pointed fangs are made for biting, not burrow- 
ing, They feed on small warm-blooded creatures 
when available, and attack larger prey when their 
normal food is scarce. It is possible that settlers in 
some places disturbed or killed the stohls’ natural 
prey, forcing the creatures to attack the settlers 
themselves. Stohls feed in the wild by injecting a 
virulent poison through their fangs, then feasting. 
Some small animals are too tiny even to bite; these 
are swallowed whole and digested later. 

Trained stohls often have their poison sacs 
removed; wearing a poisonous stohl is not only 
illegal, but stupid as well. An attack-trained stdhl 
hisses loudly when its mistress is threatened, 
then uncoils and rears up; beings who do not get 
the hint are then bitten repeatedly until either 
the target flees or the owner calls a halt. Some 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


especially vicious trainers teach their pets to 
wrap around a target, biting until he either falls 
unconscious or dies. Stohls encountered in the 
wilderness rarely entrap their prey; if a large 
target resists, the stohl flees. 

Stohl eyes have transparent layered mem- 
branes to protect them against driving snow or 
crushed ice; they allow the animals to see with 
relative clarity even in their dim burrows, magni- 
fying whatever light is present. Their fangs are 
sharp and strong, with a small poison reservoir 
running down the inside of each large fang. The 
heavy mane of fur behind the creature’s head 
allows it to push through loose snow, while the 
more sparsely-furred body follows. The lower 
jaw hangs on a drop-hinge, and the gullet ex- 
pands when necessary, allowing the stohl to 
swallow and digest large bits of meat. An effec- 
tive digestive system breaks down all compo- 
nents of the stohl’s meal, fusing all indigestible 


Adar-Attack Stohl 


bones and skin into a large ball, to be choked up 
later. Seasoned stohl-hunters can detect their 
quarry’s lair by the lumps found outside or around 
the fissure; they can even tell how old the stohl 
may be and when it last fed. 

The warm-blooded stohls are noted for their 
curiosity. An old hunter’s trick is to dangle jin- 
gling trinkets in front of the lair, or to tie a string 
to asmarl, let it wander in a ways, and then drag 
it out, hopefully with a stohl in tow. Various 
mechanical traps have been tried on Ichtor 8, but 
few such traps have ever succeeded in catching 
the elusive beast. Reaching into a crevasse is 
asking for trouble of many different kinds, includ- 
ing cave-ins, quick freeze and severe bites. Train- 
ing a captured stohl is a long process but not 
especially difficult. Unless the stohl has been 
abused in some way, it quickly bonds with who- 
ever feeds it by hand. Such bonds are hard to 
transfer, though a skilled trainer can do so. Stohls 
often enjoy playing with shiny objects (much to 
their owners’ amusement). Stohls purr content- 
edly when happy or well-fed and spit when an- 
noyed. Their fur is luxuriously soft, and is still 
prized by some black-market buyers. 

Stohls are expensive and difficult to obtain. 
Only one known world, Ichtor 8, has stohls native 
toit, andthe settlers and trappers there know the 
demand for attack stohls well. Prices vary from 
2,000 to 5,000 credits, depending on the animal's 
health and training. Owning a stohl is a mark of 
status and distinction, especially within the Core 
Worlds, far from Ichtor 8. Shantee Ren still lives 
on Mhatma 5, a cold frontier world with a large 
preserve of transplanted wild stohls. 


Adar-Attack Stohl eee me 
ES ee 


ARS 


Stohl Training 


Raising a captured stohl to bea good pet 
or bodyguard requires three Difficult beast 
training rolls (a Mechanical skill), one per 
week. Reduce this difficulty by one level if 
the character is treating the creature espe- 
cially well (sleeping with it nearby, cud- 
dling it, hand-feeding it delicacies), The 


stohl will bond with that character until it is 
badly treated or until either pet or master 
dies. 

Stohls do not take well to abuse; if the 
character treats the animal badly, it will 
bite her at the first opportunity, then slink 
off to hide. No bonding is possible thereaf- 
ter. 


m Attack Stohl 
Type: Domestic defense pet 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 2D 
Special Abilities: 
Bite: Does STR + 1D damage, 
Poison: Untreated stohls do an additional + 3D with their 
poisonous bite. This damage is stun damage only, but 
effects take 12 standard hours to recover from. 
Coil: A properly trained stohl can wrap around an oppo- 
nent in a turn by successfully scoring a Moderate Strength 
or brawling hit. A coiled stohl requires a Difficult Strength 
roll to disengage. 
Move: 5 
Size; 1-1.5 meters long 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Phil Brucato 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—STA 
-WA 


E Bandara-Borcatu 


Bandara 


Bandaras (or “sandbar dwellers” in the tongue 
of the Devaronians) are small beetles that live on 
the rivers of Devaron. Huge swarms (often mea- 
suring up to 10 meters across) of these insects 
gather on the sandbars and beaches, turning the 
white sand black. Individuals move quickly, but 
they never leave the swarm, and the swarm itself 
rarely leaves the sandbar on which it was formed. 

New swarms are created when a swarm be- 
comes too large to be supported by the area of 
river in which it lives. A number of the bandaras 
will break away, floating downriver in a large 
mass, until they land on an empty sandbar. 

Bandaras do not actively hunt, subsisting in- 
stead of whatever detritus floats their way in the 
currents of the Devaronian rivers. They find great 
success with this apparently ineffective method 
of feeding because they are able to eat almost 
anything. They use their strong mandibles (com- 
bined with the sand on which they live) to reduce 
many varied types of matter to its constituent 
elements and then extract whatever organic 
material is available. 

Because of this, Devaronian river pilots are 
extremely careful when navigating in the vicinity 


of a sandbar occupied by a bandara swarm since 
any boat that runs aground on such a sandbar 
will be quickly consumed. 

Though the female Devaronians claim that the 
bandaras pose a danger to their planet, they are, 
in fact, little more than a nuisance. While it is true 
that their voracious appetites have been respon- 
sible for the destruction of valuable property, 
and that riverways have been forced to close due 
to infestations of bandaras, these are only iso- 
lated incidents. The true reason why the female 
Devaronians have such a great dislike for 
bandaras has more to do with their mating be- 
haviors than it does with their appetites. 

During the Devaronian summers, the male 
bandaras attempt to prove their worthiness for 
procreation by “singing.” They produce their 
song by vibrating the long, narrow auracarpal 
that grows from their backs. These songs can 
reach volumes of over 160 decibels and range in 
frequency from 110 kilohertz to over 30,000 kilo- 
hertz. A swarm of singing bandaras creates an 
oppressive drone that most sentient beings find 
unbearable. Male Devaronians are one of the few 
groups of beings known to tolerate the noise, and 
it has been conjectured that they even welcome 
it because it so greatly annoys the female 
Devaronians and helps to keep the females away 
from the rivers of which the males are so fond. 

The females of Devaron have expended a great 
amount of energy in their attempts to rid the 
planet of bandaras, but they have been unsuc- 
cessful. Bandaras may be freely taken off planet 
(and, in fact, during some seasons, taking a cargo 
of bandaras off planet entitles a trader to a reduc- 
tion in tariffs), but any being caught bringing 
bandaras to Devaron is imprisoned in a small cell 
for the remainder of its natural life. 

While it is well known that the female 
Devaronians are trying to rid Devaron of bandaras, 
there are rumors in the smuggling and trading 
communities that the male Devaronians have 
spent almost as much energy in trying to save the 
bandaras. 


Bandara-—Borcatu 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


11 


Bandara—BoOrCa tL se 8 A ite 
TEPEDE 


ARS 


A Necessary Evil 


Skerrit sat alone in a dark booth in the quiet 
back corner of Felstun’s Transfer Cable Bar. 
He scratched the base of his left horn with the 
tip of his writing stylus, then began to trace 
hyperspace travel routes on the display screen 
of his portacomp. It was time to go; the only 
question was where, 

The answer came suddenly, surprisingly, 
in the form of a voice that bellowed out in the 
darkness, “Greetings, brother!” Skerrit turned 
to the source of the voice. This new individual 
was a Devaronian like Skerrit, though age had 
turned his horns white, and too much rich 
food had turned his torso into a sphere. But 
weight and age were no matter — he was a 
Devaronian. He was a brother. 

“Greetings to you, brother,” Skerrit said 
more quietly, standing respectfully. “I am 
Skerrit, spouse of Anirak.” 

“And I am Tosha, spouse of Kiela, who is 
long deceased.” The fat Devaronian squeezed 
himself into the booth, sitting on the bench 
opposite the one where Skerrit had sat. He 
motioned for Skerrit to sit. “How goes it to you, 
brother?” 

“It goes well,” Skerrit answered, “and to 
you?” 

“Well, also,” Tosha answered, “though my 
one spouse did not require half as much from 
me as do my two — unmated — offspring.” 

Skerrit knew instantly from the elder 
Devaronian’s tone that the offspring to which 
he referred were female. He nodded sympa- 
thetically. It was indeed a rare curse, to find 


m Bandara 
Type: Semi-aquatic pest 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH +1 
Special Abilities: 
Mating Song: During mating season, male bandaras make 
an extremely loud noise which is used to attract mates. 
Characters who are within 30 meters of aswarm of singing 
males must make an Easy Perception roll, Characters who 
fail the roll are unaffected, but those who succeed suffer 
a-1D penalty on all actions due to the distraction of the 
songs (characters may negate this penalty by making a 
Difficult willpower roll), 
Hunger: Bandaras can (and will) eat anything, Any object, 
including characters or other living creatures, that comes 
in contract with a swarm of bandaras suffers 1D damage 
per round of contact. 
Move: I (for the swarm), [5 (for individuals) 
Size: 2 centimeters 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Chuck Truett 


yourself forced to meet the demands of two 
females. Skerrit himself earned barely enough 
to support Anirak, and she was, by Devaronian 
standards, relatively frugal. 

“Their aunts will see them well married 
soon,” Skerrit said. 

“That is so,” Tosha answered, but his voice 
was not hopeful. He paused, staring into noth- 
ingness, despondent, watching, in his mind, as 
his wealth drizzled through his daughters’ 
fingers. “Enough of this, though,” he said, fi- 
nally, his voice brighter, “we have business.” 

“And what would that be?” Skerrit asked. 

“You carry a special cargo.” 

Skerrit nodded, Only another Devaronian 
would have known of his cargo, only another 
brother, 

“It is your time,” Tosha said, a smile of 
genuine pleasure exposing his pointed teeth. 
“No bandara were born this season. The sand- 
bars are quiet. The females are cheerful.” 

Skerrit nodded again, understanding. “They 
will not be cheerful long,” he answered. “The 
larvae I carry are healthy and strong. They will 
be the loudest singers heard for many sea- 
sons.” 

“You have made your arrangements?” Tosha 
asked. “The customs inspectors will be par- 
ticularly vigilant.” 

“Iam prepared to do my duty for my broth- 
ers,” Skerrit answered. “There will be bandaras 
on Devaron again. The females will soon be 
covering their ears and running from the sand- 
bars, and the rivers will again be ours.” 


Barri 


The enigmatic barri inhabit asteroid clusters 
throughout the galaxy. Seemingly spawned by 
electromagnetic storms on barren planetoids, 
these mysterious creatures hitch rides on debris 
from dying worlds or junked spacecraft. Immune 
to the dangers of the vacuum of space, barri feed 
off of mineral deposits and are theorized to live 
for thousands of years. Recent studies and tele- 
pathic probes indicate that barri are, in fact, 
vaguely intelligent and possess an intuitive grasp 
of complex astrogation. Xenobiologists who for 
centuries discounted stories of barri as spacer 
folklore are now beginning to take a serious 
interest in these odd alien beings. 

Few documented facts about the barri are 
known; they can survive in deep space, secrete 
acids which dissolve rock and metal into simple 
mineral compounds, and can float in space for 
many years while waiting for a “ride” towards 
some unknown destination. Dissected specimens 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


a T AR 2110 ala—BOrcatu 
ppn 


-WA 


reveal no reproductive organs, lungs, stomach 
or excretory system, and only the most rudimen- 
tary sensory organs, circulatory channels or 
musculature. They appear to reproduce sponta- 
neously; spacer legends claim that huge electri- 
cal disturbances spawn small barri, who grow to 
maturity over centuries of asteroid travel. How 
mortal spacers could track the lifespans of seem- 
ingly immortal lifeforms remains a topic for de- 
bate. Nevertheless, studies of tagged barri, fol- 
lowed for decades at a time, indicate that the 
species is exceedingly long-lived and follows no 
known biological process. 

Barri feed by lapping at the debris on which 
they ride. Their acidic spittle breaks the material 
down to base components, which the barri suck 
up into a gourdlike organ located just above their 
legs. With these legs, the barri trundle across the 
surface of their “homes” or grasp the edges of 
passing ships. The sharp points of barri “feet” dig 
in for purchase, When an asteroid crumbles or 
departs from the barri’s chosen path, the crea- 
ture utilizes gases stored in a sac beneath its 
gullet to propel it out of the asteroid’s weak 
gravitational pull. The barri then waits, floating 
in space until some other debris comes its way, 
which could theoretically take centuries; 
xenobiologists who speculate on the species’ 
intelligence have no idea what the creatures 
could be thinking about during this endless wait. 

The most intriguing ability the barri possess 
seems to bean innate directional sense. Although 


the brain structure of these creatures is painfully 
simple, barri that have been tracked for some 
time appear to follow a single planned course. 
Some spacers, like the Gotals and Ugors, offer 
rides to barri that seem to be going their way. 
Through an organic “mind-bond” that Human 
xenobiologists can barely comprehend, these 
alien spacers seem to subconsciously communi- 
cate with their barri guides. In return for a “lift,” 
the barri aids the ship’s navigator, who pro- 
grams any suggested paths into his computer — 
the aid seems to come in the form of sudden 
bursts of intuition that lead a navigator to a safe 
course. The Gotals claim that such advice has 
never failed. 

Although barri will consume starship debris 
when on their own, they will not damage a ship 
that gives them a lift to their destination. This 
behavior indicates some degree of abstract 
thought and behavioral restraint. No other at- 
tempt to communicate with barri, however, has 
yet succeeded. 

The paths these beings travel seem to lead 
away from the galactic core. Folklore speculates 
that a barri homeworld lies somewhere out in 
Wild Space. Why a species that thrives in open 
space would need a homeworld remains to be 
seen, and no two barri have ever been observed 
together. Nevertheless, several researchers have 
dedicated their lives to discovering this fabled 
place. Perhaps, ifthey are successful, the myster- 
ies of the barri will be solved. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


Bandara—Bor Cat U meee fA We 
a, 


EE Bergruutfa. 


m Barri 
Type: Mysterious spacefaring creature 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Corrosive Spittle: Barri exude acid on their tongues, This 
acid can burn for 3D of damage per turn until it is washed 
away. Protective armor or tough skin will be damaged by 
this acid, which wears away at the material until it is 
consumed, 
Innate Navigational Sense: Through some mysterious in- 
tuition, barri have an effective astrogation skill of 6D. 
Move: 10* 
Size: Roughly 4 meters long 
Scale: Creature 
* Meters per round, not Space units. 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Phil Brucato 


ARS 


Bergruutfa 


Bergruutfas are large but placid grazing beasts 
native to the plains, jungles and forests of Teloc 
Ol-sen. These creatures have become popular- 
ized because they were the historic mounts of 
the famed Teloc Hunters. 

Bergruutfas are known for both their size and 
their mild temperament. Known to grow upwards 
of seven meters tall, the lumbering giants are 
perfect for traversing the treacherous terrain of 
their world. They are forceful enough to move 
encroaching vegetation from paths, but are also 
surefooted. 

They are incredibly calm and patient, and 
have been known to not even deign to take notice 
of other jungle animals around them; they have 
such thick armor plating all over their bodies 
that most attacks are completely ineffective, caus- 
ing no damage whatsoever. This armor is also 
thick enough to stop the blaster bolts of many 
hand weapons, making them quite suitable as 
war beasts. When they do get angry, however, 
they are quite dangerous and there are few hand- 
portable weapons that can stop them. 

The animals show keen intelligence, and even 
a sense of humor. They learn their names and 
commands easily; they can often be sent off todo 
simple tasks without direct supervision. As farm 
animals, war beasts and caravan animals, they 
excel; they are also excellent guard beasts, being 
quite capable of stopping most intruders with a 
loud grunt and a simple head butt. As for their 
sense of humor, they have been known to “hide” 
objects belonging to their riders and then physi- 
cally use the bulk of their bodies to prevent their 
masters from finding the pilfered object. They 
are also playful, but considering their bulk some- 
times their playful “rough-housing” borders on 
the downright dangerous. 

Bergruutfa are quite intelligent and affection- 
ate, and are known to bond with their riders. 
Bergruutfa that are domesticated behave much 
like herds in the wild, protecting the young and 
feeble, and often gathering food for the weaker 
members of the herd. If they are well-cared for, 
their masters are often treated as if they too were 
part of the herd. This loyalty has been extremely 
beneficial for the many primitive tribes of Teloc 
Ol-sen. Bergruutfas have been exported to many 
other primitive worlds for similar purposes; it is 
known that several Rebel Alliance bases use the 
animals for patrols. 

Their coloration ranges from light brown to 
dark green, but during winter seasons their col- 
oring lightens considerably. Young are almost 
always brown when they are born. 

In the wild, they travel in herds of upwards of 
150 beasts, although most herds seldom exceed 
30 or 40 adults and the accompanying calves 


14 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—STA 
-WA 


(normally about a 
dozen for a herd that 
large). They feed onthe 
rich vegetation of their 
world, relishing the 
fruits, nuts, branches 
and leaves of the count- 
less plants to be found in 
their native regions. They 
consume immense quan- 
tities of vegetation and can 
strip whole forests in short 
order. As adults, they have no natu- 
ral predators in the wild but neither do 
they hunt animals — they seem to 
peacefully coexist with other crea- 
tures in the wild. Young bergruutfas 
are hunted by large predators on 
Teloc Ol-sen, but often other herd 
member adults are around to protect 
them. 

One quite noticeable thing about 
bergruutfas is that they produce an j 
inordinately large amount of saliva; as 
with many other animals, their saliva is a 
digestive aid while their massive jaws grind 
the plants. However, bergruutfas are known to 
leave large pools of their saliva in their wake. 
While this does not bother those who are experi- 
enced with the animals, it is somewhat perturb- 
ing to many off-worlders when they first encoun- 
ter the animals — and presents a very real hazard 
in combat situations. 


m Bergruutfa 
Type: Domesticated riding beast 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 1D+2 
Search 3D+1 
STRENGTH 6D 
Brawling: head butt 7D, lifting 9D 
Special Abilities: 
Armored Head: +2D energy and physical to resist damage. 
Armored Body: +1D energy and physical to resist damage. 
Head Butt: STR+1D damage; for every two result points on 
the attack roll, the target has been thrown one meter. 
Drool: Bergruutfas produce a lot of saliva: any being 
unfortunate enough to step in a sizeable puddle of drool 
must make an Easy Dexterity total not to fall. 
Move: 15 
Size: Up to 7 meters tall 
Scale: Creature 
Orneriness: 1D 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Bill Smith 


Bogan’ Brown Nafen 


The winged rodents known as nafen are found 
on planets throughout the galaxy, but Bogan’s 
brown nafen, one of the largest and most un- 
wholesome species (commonly called 
“butterbats” by the galactic media), are only 
found on planets that are primarily tropical. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


Like all nafen, 
brown nafen prima- 
rily consume insects 

and other small, fly- 

ing creatures, and 
gather their food while 
flying through the air. 
This behavior would 
cause many to consider 
the nafen to be beneficial 
creatures, but any benefits 
accorded by the nafen are coun- 
tered by the risks that are cre- 
ated by a large population of the 
creatures. 

Whilethenafen consume large 
numbers of insects, they also 
provide an extremely efficient 
method for the transmission of 

disease. The Hardan plague that 

resulted in the deaths of 98% of 
the inhabitants of Dagelin Minor 
was traced to a single shipment of 
brown nafen that were imported in 
an attempt to control an infestation of 
dhuru flies. 

The venom and fangs of the nafen are prima- 
rily a defensive measure, meant to be irritating, 
not fatal. However, like many avians, nafen are 
extremely territorial, and the entire swarm will 
gather together to attack any creature that en- 
ters their breeding area. While the attack of an 
individual nafen is of little concern to most preda- 
tors, the attack of an entire swarm — and the 
amount of venom delivered by the resulting bites 
— is often fatal. 

Juvenile nafen are tailless, quadrupedal ro- 
dents that are rarely seen because they are ex- 
tremely small (no more than two centimeters in 
length) nocturnal herbivores, who often feed by 
burrowing through the soil and eating roots and 
tubers. 

At some time, a currently unknown trigger 
causes the juvenile nafen’s rate of hair growth to 
increase substantially, and it burrows deeply 
into the ground. Its skin begins excreting an 
extremely sticky sebum, which, when combined 
with the thick, oily fur, produces a cocoon that 
soon envelopes the nafen. While in the cocoon, 
the nafen grows wings, and its fangs and glands 
develop, so that the creature that emerges from 
the cocoon and digs its way to the surface is a 
fully developed adult nafen, ready to take its 
place in the first swarm which it encounters. 

Nothing preys on the mature nafen, but many 
small predators feed on the non-flying juvenile 
nafen. Juveniles are also considered delicacies 
by many reptilian sentient species. While it is 
illegal to import any species of nafen into many 


Bandara-—Borcatu 


systems (whether in the juvenile or adult forms) 
because of the number of diseases that they may 
carry, there are many other systems that encour- 
age the importation of nafen because of the 
amount of insects that they can consume. 


w Bogan’'s Brown Nafen 
Type: Aeroreal insectivorous rodent 
DEXTERITY 5D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Special Abilities: 
Venom: Nafen produce a relatively weak venom, but they 
attack in large numbers, and the cumulative effect of large 
numbers of nafen bites can be deadly. 
Characters who are bitten by less than 10 nafen will not be 
harmed (with the exception of the slight stinging sensa- 
tion that accompanies each bite). However, characters 
who are bitten by 10 or more nafen must make a Very Easy 
Strength roll to avoid being affected by the poison (this roll 
should be made following every tenth nafen bite), Charac- 
ters who fail their Strength rolls become drowsy and suffer 
a -1D penalty (cumulative) on all actions. If the penalty 
being suffered by the character becomes greater than the 
character's Strength, then the character becomes inca- 
pacitated, and falls asleep. 


Zazu alone knows how the borcatu became 
as scattered throughout the galaxy as they 
are. These ill-tempered trash-diggers have 
been traced to Escabar, but they appear to 
have stowed away on some early vessel from 
that planet and propagated themselves across 
the known worlds. Their rate of reproduction 
is quite high; their temper threshold is quite 
low. 

On their homeworld, the borcatu originated 
inthe northeast deserts of Serhan. Their tough 
hide may have evolved to protect them from 
the elements and the harsh sandstorms that 
those deserts are known for. The creatures’ 
hard claws and strong jaws were obviously 
intended for digging burrows and snapping 
open shells. But when traders from Khrassh 
crossed the deserts on their way to the newly- 
opened spaceports, some borcatu clambered 
aboard and hitched a ride on the departing 
craft. Borcatu pups, measuring only a few 
centimeters at birth, are hard to detect in 
engine rooms, maintenance shafts and life- 
support ducts. By the time the traders had 
discovered their undeclared cargo, several 
borcatu had already left on other ships. And 
so the vermin were scattered ... 

“Vermin” is perhaps too sharp a word. 
Borcatu are clean for scavengers and leave 
little in the way of waste. Desert born, the 
borcatu are efficient by nature. For this rea- 


A Widespread Scavenger 


Bandara-BorcCatuU me i A Wn 
aana | 


ARS 


The effects of the nafen's poison can be cured by the 
successful application of a medpac, or by six to 10 hours 
of uninterrupted sleep. 

Disease Transmission: A\\ characters who are bitten by a 
nafen must make a Moderate Strength roll to avoid becom- 
ing diseased. Diseased characters automatically become 
wounded at the time of the onset of the disease (6-15 
hours following the time of the injury). Curing the disease 
is an Easy medicine task, requiring access to common 
pharmaceuticals. 

Move: 30 (flying), 4 (walking) 

Size: 30 centimeter wingspan 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Chuck Truett 


Borcatu 


Small and bad tempered, borcatu range from 
desert sands to urban slums, crossing the galaxy 
as stowaways on trading vessels. These tough 
little creatures have rock-hard digging claws and 
powerful jaws, which they use on anyone who 
tries to pick them up. Borcatu come in a variety 
of colors, though most tend towards mottled 
dark patterns suitable for camouflage. 


son, they are hard to detect unless scanners 
are sweptacross the ship itself, When the pack 
becomes too large — between five and 50 
members, depending on the size of the ship — 
many of the pack depart at the next port. 
Though pudgy, borcatu are fast; dockworkers 
hate the beasts with a passion, 

Within the 150 standard years since the 
ports of Escabar have been open to interstel- 
lar trade, borcatu have spread from the Core 
Worlds to the Outer Rim Territories, Small 
ships have little chance of hiding more than 
one or two (if any at all), but capital ships can 
have dozens aboard and not even know it. The 
short-lived monsters lead short lives — rarely 
longer than a standard year — and when one 
dies, the others eat him. Such a wonderful 
existence! 

And their manners! O, their manners! 
Borcatu are snappish fricks, biting anyone 
who comes near them. For being the stout 
things that they are, borcatu move quickly, 
and finding them in a refuse pile or dark shaft 
is a hard thing to do. They fight among them- 
selves, too, when food is hard to come by, and 
the winners eat the losers. 

From the slums of Arramanx to the forests 
of Kashyyyk, borcatu are everywhere. Zazu 
alone knows how they spread so fast. Zazu 
alone knows how we'll get rid of them ... 


Creatures of the Galax 


Bandara-—Borcatu 


-WA 


m Borcatu 
Type: Testy scavenger 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 1D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Bite: Does STR+2 damage. 
Claws: Do STR+1 damage. 
Armored Hide- Adds +2 to resist damage from physical 
attacks. 
Digging: Borcatu can hollow out a burrow or dig out tasty 
morsels in record time, 
Move: 11 
Size: 0.2-0.5 meters long. 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Phil Brucato 


Creatures of the Galaxy 17 


Chefer—Croator 


AR 
ARS 


E Cherfer—Croator 


Cherfer 


“May your children bear the nose, trust and 
temperament of a wild rabid cherfer!” 
— Elomin curse 


Unlike the halfway civil ranphyx, the cherfers 
of Elom’s deserts are vicious killers, herd beasts 
so wrathful that they have been known to turn on 
their own kind and gore them to death with sharp 
hooves and their bony snouts. Despite efforts to 
eradicate the cherfers, they not only remain, 
they thrive. 

Newborn cherfers are born aggressive; 
xenobiologists have noted that litters begin fight- 
ing each other with their vestigial nasal horns. 
These horns fall away while the young foals 
nurse, and the bony ridge jutting from their snout 
grows as the cherfer attains maturity. The beasts 
age quickly, going from stumbling foalhood to 
kicking, spitting youth in Jess than six standard 
months. Like so many creatures of the plains, 
cherfers are omnivorous. Their preferred meal, 
however, is flesh. Although small burrowing 
mammals make up alarge part of the cherfer diet, 
the beasts will not hesitate to attack larger mam- 
mals, ranphyx, or even Elomin if food is scarce. 

Cherfer coats are rough and brightly-colored. 
Red, orange and yellow stripes on an off-white base 
coat are common, though green or blue stripes are 
not unheard of. Cherfers in colder climates tend 
towards light base coats while those in more tem- 
perate regions grow steadily darker. 

Cherfers are quite stupid; the cleverest could 
not best a bantha in a battle of wits. Like so many 
other beings, however, a cherfer's stupidity is 
inversely proportionate to its viciousness. Herds, 
called viaktors by the native Elomin, are tempo- 
rary social units; cherfers scrap within their 
vlaktor, get thrown out, wander, and, provided 
they survive their time alone, rejoin another 
viaktor by laying open all comers. Cherfer vlaktors 
number between five to 30 individuals, depend- 
ing on the season and available prey. Anyone 
attacked by a cherfer viaktor is an unhappy being 
indeed, as the creatures attack in force, run their 
prey to ground, and gore them to death. Some 
criminal gangs even export cherfers to decadent 
worlds for arena sport. Although captive cherfers 
can live 15 standard years or more, wild ones 
rarely do. 


18 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


-WA 


These ruthless habits have bred a powerful 
beast; cherfers are neither large nor strong, but 
tend instead to be tough, fast and tenacious. An 
angry cherfer will not flee a fight until its oppo- 
nent drops. Even then, some have been know to 
gore their prey to death while selfsame prey tries 
to crawl to safety. A cherfer seeking an elusive 
burrower will tear up meters of ground to get at 
it. Elomin miners and farmers despise cherfers 
and hunt them down whenever possible. This, 
however, merely keeps the cherfer population in 
check; the beasts reproduce quickly, grow to 
maturity with speed, and either live or die by 
their sinew and spite. 


w Cherfer 
Type: Vicious herd beast 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Snout: Cherfers can gore an opponent for STR+1D damage 
or use their snout to dig into the ground. 
Hooves: Do STR+1D damage with a kick and can quickly 
turn up a lot of earth. 
Move: 14 
Size: 1-1.5 meters at the shoulder 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Phil Brucato 


Chiilaks 


Chiilaks are large, six-limbed omnivores in- 
habiting the glacial regions of the moon Misnor. 
On that world, their skins are quite valuable for 
furred garments, such as coats and cloaks, and 
thus they are a soughtafter prize of hunters who 
roam the frigid seas and oceans of their world. 

Fortunately for the chiilak, they are far from 
defenseless. They are tall and immensely strong 
beasts, and their bulk assures that anyone unfor- 
tunate enough to get within grappling range of 
the beasts will suffer grevious injuries —chiilaks 
have been known to flatten Wookiees with one 
swing. Their rear limbs have sharp claws, which 
are used for climbing as well as combat. 

Chiilaks excel at water travel: their four for- 
ward limbs are long and muscular, with webbed 
“paws.” They swim quite swiftly. Chiilaks are air 
breathers, but can hold their breath for up to 20 
minutes at a time, They can remain underwater 
for extended periods of time and dive into the 
deep, frigid waters of Misnor’s oceans to hunt for 
fish. With their great stamina, chiilaks have been 
known to swim 300 kilometers in a single day. 

Hunting chiilaks is more difficult than many 
people would suspect. Because of their tendency 
to stay in water for extended periods, hunters are 
often forced to don aquatic breathers and insu- 
lated suits. Even with servo-enhanced articulators 
and ranged spear guns, they are no match for 
chiilaks underwater. 

Chiilaks tend toward white, grey or tan colora- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


tion, with the hair darkening as the chiilak gets 
older. Their diet consists of fish, marine plants 
and a number of bushes, grasses and berries that 
thrive on the surface of the frozen regions of 
Misnor. While their natural lifespan can be over 
50 local years, few chiilaks now live beyond the 
age of 20 due to uncontrolled hunting. Many 
xenobiologists have lobbied Imperial Governor 
Yettaw to restrict or ban chiilak hunting, but the 
Governor has sided with the local garment manu- 
facturers’ association, which derives immense 
profit from chiilak-furred garments. 
Xenobiologists have noted how the continued 
hunting has changed the chiilaks. Their popula- 
tion has dwindled, from an estimate of over 100 
million just 25 years ago, to now under three 
million chiilaks (these are estimates; the 
northenmost regions of Misnor are lightly popu- 
Jated and much ofthe planet remains unexplored), 
While chiilaks initially tended to flee from Hu- 
mans (and other species) when their world was 
first colonized, they have learned what a danger 


Chefer—Croator 


Chefer-Croator m WA Wes 


From the journal of Jio Gihal, Xenobiologist on Misnor 


After weeks of searching for chiilaks, today 
my patience was rewarded ... and then some. 
My mission to research chiilak migration and 
living habits had so far been unsuccessful. 
The area was thick with hunting skiffs, all of 
them searching for the few remaining chiilaks 
in the North Berr Sea. | had taken to a small bay 
in hopes that some chiilaks would be hiding 
here, but my subsonic gear had detected no 
signs of them below the surface. 

After three hours of fruitless observation, I 
decided to eat and then move on to another 
area. A wind was starting to blow in from the 
ocean, and it was clear that a bad storm would 
be coming in by nightfall. | would have to 
return to the hunting village. 

I had just broken out my lunch packets 
when the detection system registered three 
targets moving about 50 meters underwater. I 
followed the progress of the targets, and saw 
that they were surfacing not more than 300 or 
400 meters from my research skiff. 

Pulling out my macrobinoculars, I got a fix 
on them: three young chiilaks. They were only 
about a meter long, not yet half grown, and 
were frolicking in the water. After a few min- 
utes, they crawled up onto the land, heading 
for the small teloberry bushes about 10 meters 
inland. They fed slowly, also taking the time to 
rest from what must have been an exhausting 
swim. As | watched, I detected another target 
on the subsonic scanner — this one was much 
larger and was headed straight for my repulsor 
skiff! 

I grabbed my stunner, even though I knew 
it probably wouldn't do much good against a 
full grown chiilak. I held my breath as I waited 
for it to surface. A splash of water sprayed me 
as the adult raised its head above the water; 
the adult was only two meters from the skiff! It 
watched me closely, as if cautious, but not 
fearful. 


I wondered what would happen. I had heard 
the stories of the chiilak attacks on lone be- 
ings, or even hunting ships. I didn’t know what 
to do, so I did the obvious: remained motion- 
less. 

It stared at me for several long minutes with 
those golden, unblinking eyes. Suddenly, its 
attention was distracted for a second and it 
turned and barked at the three cubs on the 
beach — the noise was defeaning! It made a 
high-pitched whistle and barked once more, 
slapping the surface of the water with its for- 
ward paws. Then, as quickly as it had come, 
the adult dove back into the water, while the 
three cubs awkwardly raced for the water. 
Just as the ripples from their dives faded, | 
heard the all-too familiar whine of arepulsorlift 
motor: a hunting skiff. 

I turned my skiff around and raced out to 
meet the other vessel. The captain, a young 
man in his early twenties, asked if I'd seen any 
of the chiilaks, pointing out that there was a 
100 credit reward if I helped him hunt down 
any of them. 

I tried to politely send him on his way, 
telling him that I hadn’t seen any and that I was 
just out surveying some of the wildlife for a 
local tourist office. He seemed to accept my 
answer at face value, and ordered his two 
shipmates to send the skiff back out into the 
open water. 

As I found myself alone again, I saw the 
clouds beginning to gather overhead. It was 
too symbolic for my taste: the calm before the 
storm, the calm before the people here hunted 
the chiilaks into extinction. | saw a ripple on 
the water just to my left. The adult's head 
emerged from the surface, and once again 
those haunting golden eyes stared at me. With 
a snort, the creature dropped back underwa- 
ter. 


hunters represent. They are now known to attack PERCEPTION 2D 

Humans and common species, which in turn, has Search 4D, tracking 4D 

led to Governor Yettaw labeling the creatures a STRENGTH 4D+2 

“u ” 8 s J Brawling 5D, climbing/jumping 5D, swimming 6D 
menace,” and thereby encouraging increased Special Abilities: 


Claws: STR+1D damage. 

Stamina: Chiilaks can hold their breath for 20 minutes and 
have immense stamina: they can swim for hours at a time 
before tiring. 

Move: 9 (land), 18 (swimming) 


hunting of chiilaks. The few permanent commu- 
nities in these areas (mostly hunting villages) 
must now build barriers around their perimenters 
and post guards to fend off chiilak attacks. 


w Chiilak Size: Up to 2.2 meters tall 
i Scale: Creature 
Type: Aquatic mammal 
PERIE ns Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Bill Smith 


Dodge 4D, brawling parry 6D 


20 Creatures of the Galaxy 


NN eee. Chefer—Croator 
Dap -n 


-WA 


Survival by Any Means 


“We found the poor glick by his escape 
pod; I’m telling you, he was glad to be 
leaving! Bad sunburn, and a fever that nearly 
wrecked the temp-scale. He was raving, too, 
goin’ on about giant worms that sang off- 
key and tall ladies with six eyes and green 
hoods. Took three days in bacta before he 
was anywhere near coherent. 

“Anyway, this guy was wrapped up in 
some kinda skin; it was sorta greenish-white, 
and slick like vicra but a lot thicker. Any- 
way, our boy claimed that he got it offa this 
bird-thing with a schnoz down to here and 
big double-jointed legs. The wrap he wore 
was beat all to blazes, but Nita fed it to 
Analysis just to figure it out. They said it 
was organic, but couldn’t type the genetic- 
strand. Bering — that’s the guy — says it’s 
all that kept him from bein’ baked. 

“If you’re set on goin’ out to Wyndigal 
system, keep a vibro-blade handy. Bering 
says the skin doesn’t come off easily. Said 
he had torip it away like ... you feelin’ okay? 
You look sick. Food here’s lousy. I wouldn't 
eat it ...” 


Croator 


Scouts landing on Wyndigal 2 have two op- 
tions for survival; protective suits or a poncho 
made from the membrane of the croator, an 
unusual creature native to the planet. Beneath 
the harsh light of the Wyndigal system's sun, 
Human skin blisters and burns. Though the sys- 
tem sustains no sentient life, Wyndigal 2 has 
spawned some interesting (and potentially help- 
ful) beings. 

Astifling humid scrub-swamp greets travelers 
unfortunate enough to land on Wyndigal 2. Water 
is everywhere, but high concentrations of ultra- 
violet light have warmed that water to uncom- 
fortable levels. The odd color spectrum — rang- 
ing into deeper hues than the Human eye can 
accept —also disorients many travelers’ percep- 
tions. Many scouts and rescue parties landing 
there have experienced hallucinations, perhaps 
caused by an odd airborne bacteria. All in all, 
Wyndigal 2 is an uncomfortable place to visit. 

The croator, native to Wyndigal 2, pick through 
the ever-present marshlands, sucking nourish- 
ment from the microorganisms teeming in the 
brackish mud. Croator gather in temporary bands 
of three to five. These bands wander apart when 
the local food has been consumed. Croator ap- 
pear to reproduce asexually, stimulating their 
reproductive centers once a standard year. Preg- 
nant croator lay eggs after a gestation period of 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


three months; these eggs hatch into miniature 
versions of adult croator, which scatter into the 
swamps in search of food. Many wind up as food 
for other animals, but enough survive to keep the 
species viable. 

The most interesting features these beings 
display are their flexible joints and reflective 
plumage and hood. The former appendages can 
bend nearly double, either to crouch closely into 
the water or to unfold up for running. The latter 
protective membranes allow croator to feed dur- 
ing periods of the heaviest solar bombardment. 
These stark white and slick blue features drape 
loosely about a croator’s body during the early 
parts of the day. As the day drags on, the croator 
wrap themselves in their hoods and squint their 
heavily-lidded eyes against the constant glare as 
they feed. Inhaling its food through a dangling 
proboscis, each croator vacuums its chosen spot 
of tiny fish, insects and microorganisms. 


m Croator 
Type: Swamp avian 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 1D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Reflective Plumage and Hood: These shiny membranes 
reflect powerful ultraviolet rays. Though this will not 
deflect potent attacks or provide long-term protection for 
Humans, an off-worlder can add + 2D to survival rolls to 
withstand the climate of 
Wyndigal 2. 
Move: 15 (running), 10 
(swimming) 
Size: 2.5 meters tall at 
the shoulder. 


bere) 
(cee 


RTC 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Ve 


nters/Design: Phil Brucato 


Danchaf—Fenner's Rock 


Rock 


Danchaf (Tree Goblin) 


There is great debate as to whether danchaf, 
also called “tree goblins,” should be considered 
sentient beings or animals. Most xenobiologists 
claim that the beasts lack the abstract reasoning, 
communication skills and societal structure 
shared by intelligent species, while the quarrel- 
some Jenet of Garban, the danchaf homeworld, 
argue that the 

goblins 


— 
me 
Poa 


AR 
ARS 


EE Danchaf—Fenner's 


exhibit problem-solving skills and complex inter- 
actions when they aren’t being observed by 
offworlders. The tree goblins, the natives claim, 
are too smart to be successfully studied. In fact, 
they are one of the few predator species to 
survive the Jenets’ cleansing of their homeworld. 

According to the legends of the Jenet, danchaf 
packs once marauded across the forests of 
Garban. It was only the courage of leaders like 
Chirr’t Ferr and the mighty Rhet H’rrr, backed by 
brave warriors, that broke the danchaf strangle- 
hold on the upper world, enabling the Jenet to 
claim their rightful supremacy on Garban. Since 
the days of the Great Conquest, the tree goblins 
have fallen into their current primitive state. 
Nevertheless, the Jenet claim, the danchaf re- 
main more subtle and intelligent than they ap- 
pear. 

Xenobiologists dismiss this as piffle; the tree 
goblins, they say, are primates of the most el- 
ementary kind. Only one accredited study 
(Xemlorn, Lesser-Known Sentients, Vol. 3) docu- 

ments tool or language use among the 
danchaf. All other studies have dismissed 

Xemlorn’s observations as fantasy fed by 

the wild tales of the Jenet. The debate 

continues. 
Danchaf are known to be ferocious pack 
carnivores, hunting from the trees in groups 
of five to 15. They stalk their prey with their 
keen sight and smell, then leap from the trees, 


sf 
often onto one predetermined target. Their tac- 
tics do indicate some degree of cunning, but 
other pack animals exhibit similar behavior, Al- 


though danchaf have been known to eat tree 
fruits on occasion, fresh meat is their obvious 
preference. 
Heavy (roughly 150 kilograms) and bipedal, 
danchaf have broad shoulders and large climb- 
ing claws, One large heart pumps viscous blood 
—resembling tree sap — through their veins. 
Their faces appear expressive, and can range 
from angry scowls to contented grins. Large 
horns project from their shoulders and backs. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


-ST eee Danchaf—Fenner’s Rock 
OOC u a E 


-WA 


Xenobiologists have speculated about these 
horns, but they serve no obvious purpose. Tree 
goblins communicate with odd cooing sounds, 
which seem incongruous coming from such men- 
acing beings, The leathery skin of a danchaf can 
deflect small missile weapons but offers little 
protection against blasters. Their coloration 
tends to run from light mottled greens to speck- 
led browns and blacks; these colors offer some 
concealment among the trees the goblins hunt 
from. 

Packs of danchaf often cluster around one 
powerful leader. These individuals can come 
from any of four different genders. No single sex 
appears to have an advantage in leadership. 
Female goblins bear a single child while the other 
three genders, male, camale and shamale, con- 
tribute to the conception. All three genders are 
necessary; the Jenet claim that Rhet Hrrr tar- 
geted attacks against camale goblins and thus 
cut deeply into future generations. For whatever 
reason, camale gender danchaf are somewhat 
rare. Xenobiologists have lobbied for protected 
status for this gender, to no avail. Danchaf cubs 
grow to maturity in roughly a standard year; 
adults live for as long as 50 years. 

The keen senses of the tree goblins are quite 
susceptible to loud noises or bright light. One 
Jenet ballad (if such doggerel can rightly be 
called a ballad) tells of a huge trap laid by Ch’irrk 
Felt, utilizing pots and pans and a large pile of 
bright-burning phospowder. While the danchaf 
were disoriented, Jenet warriors sprang upon 
them and hacked the predators to pieces. 
Whether there is any truth to this tale or not, 
travelers to Garban are well advised to carry a 
bright light source or two. The forests are exten- 
sive and not at all safe, despite the large Jenet 
population. For all their bluster, the natives of 
Garban remain wary of the woodlands. While the 
tree goblins may be rare and primitive, they 
continue to pose a threat to travelers. 


ms Danchaf (Tree Goblin) 
Type: Organized predator 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
STRENGTH 2D+1 (3D+1 for larger goblins) 
Brawling 4D, climbing/jumping 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Claws: Do STR+1D damage. 
Climbing: Because of their claws and natural affinity for 
climbing, tree goblins get +1D to climbing rolls. 
Stealth: Perception rolls to spot danchaf are made at one 
difficulty level higher when the creatures are in trees or 
bushes. 
Senses: Danchaf have exceptional tracking senses; they 
get +1D+2 for search, search: tracking and Perception rolls, 
Move: 8 
Size: 1.5-2 meters tall 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Phil Brucato 


The Ballad of Shan’Gredor 


Once we hunted goblins bad 

Among trees of Garban’s land; 

They killed and ate Ch’irrk Felt’s kin, 
And mighty anger boiled within! 


A clamorous trap he proposed to lay, 

To keep the foul beasts at bay 

While we avenged our fallen brothers 

And scattered blood, as was our ‘druthers. 


Burning powder and iron pot 

We placed upon a tripline sot, 

To drop noisemakers to the ground 
And deafen the danchaf with the sound. 


By half-past ort, we head a crack 

Of branches ‘neath the goblins’ weight, 
We readied weapons for attack 

And sprang as clamor the beasts did shake! 


Ch'irrk Felt's cry of battle rallied 

Our hearts to the heroic slaughter, 
When it was over, the dead were tallied; 
Three cousins dead, one my daughter. 


My heart was rent, but the treasure was 
great, 

Twenty goblins, whom we hate, 

Lie dead upon the soggy earth, 

So let us rejoice, and emerge with mirth! 


Draagax 


The draagax are a particularly nasty form of 
cave-dwelling hunter indigenous to the planet 
Relkass. Draagax are pack-oriented predators 
who hunt primarily along the planet's equatorial 
grasslands, living in the many caves that dot the 
neighboring foothills. Draagax feed primarily on 
the tall razorgrass and small rodents found in the 
region, but prefer the wild Relkass sentinel plant 
(a form of native cacti) that blooms in the dry 
season. It is during this time that the draagax are 
the most dangerous. 

The Relkass sentinel plant contains a chemical 
compound which reacts as a powerful narcotic. 
Once in the bloodstream, even small amounts of 
plant toxin can send the average draagax into a 
berserker-like frenzy (which can last up to several 
hours). During this period the draagax will attack 
warm-blooded creatures on sight. In this they are 
aided by their ability to detect heat sources. Packs 
of berserker draagax have even been known to 
attack parties of unsuspecting Humanoids. For this 
reason, local officials offer large bounties each year 
to cull the draagax population during the danger- 
ous dry season, so as to minimize losses to local 
ranchers. Only the most experienced hunters ap- 
ply for the job. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


23 


Danchaf—Fenner’S ROCK muss A A fees 
SS ee eee ee, aa 


“That's what Jameson jokingly called it. Come along 
for the fun of it, he’d said. He said the 200 credit 
bounty on each draagax pelt was more than reason- 
able and the evening promised a real challenge for a 
real sportsman. All right, call it pride if you like, but I 
went along with him, against my better judgment. 
Maybe Jameson was right. After all he’d lived here all 
his life. If he said we could handle things, he ought to 
know. And, maybe this was an easy way to make 
enough credits to ship out. Boy, were we ever wrong. 

“We weren't morethan 500 meters from the Jameson 
ranch before we heard the first high-pitched cries of 
a pack of drags on the hunt. That keening, ululating 
yelp of theirs will stay with me for years to come. I'd 
heard that the drags were fast, but I never realized 
how fast that really meant. The first cries had barely 
died away before the first sound of padded paws on 
dried grass signalled our first 


A Moonlight Stroll In The Country ... 


ARS" 


the attack. Most of us were still shedding our back- 
packs when the first pair hit us. Grendles went down 
— and the magnaflare pole with him — before we 
knew what happened. I still see him twitching and 
convulsingas atwo meter-long furry something started 
ripping into him. | brought up my blaster but was 
startled by Zonder’s agonized screams from behind 
me. | realized that we were surrounded. 

“As I started firing in the dark in all directions | 
reminded myself that these were pack animals. Some- 
how, this pack had got it in their heads to circle 
around us first before closing in from all sides. How 
many there were that night I can’t say, and | frankly 
don’t want to know. Thinking about it afterwards, | 
can’t say for sure just who was acting more insane 
that night — all those crazy drags spiced up on plant 
juice or the idiot Humans standing back to back, firing 

madly into the darkness over and over again, 


“Come first light we sank to the ground, 
exhausted. When we could finally make out 
shapes and sizes, we counted three of our own 
party among the carcasses of some 30 drags. 

Seemed a hard way to make a few credits. Still, it 
was enough to get me off planet, but I, for one, 
never want to see another drag the rest of my life.” 


... and last ... warning of 


— personal diary entry, 
Commander Lajar Weqill 


m Draagax 
Type: Crazed nocturnal omnivore 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Dodge 5D, running 6D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 5D, climbing/jumping 5D 
Special Abilities: 
Enhanced Speed: After ingesting modesfamounts of Relkass 
sentinel plant, the draagax lapse into a chemically-in- 
duced berserker state which lasts several hours. A by- 
product of this berserker state is an increased movement 
rate, which goes to 28. 
Infrared Vision; Draagax eyes can see into the infrared 
portion of the electro-magnetic spectrum. During periods 
of darkness, draagax can see with no penalties. 
Poisoned Fangs; Draagax carry a set of specialized fangs 
behind their primary cutting incisors. These are con- 
nected to poison glands located along the Jower jaw 
When the draagax attack, they use their primary cutting 
teeth to hold their prey while injecting them with a 
paralytic poison, Humanoijds coming in contact with 
draagax poison must make a stamina roll at Moderate 
level to avoid immediate incapacitation. Stamina rolls 
increase one difficulty level with each successive bite 
received. 
Move: 12 
Size: 1.6-2.0 meters tall at the shoulder. 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


24 Creatures of the Galaxy 


DN eee ee SSL Danchaf—Fenner’s Rock 
a a Tl 


-WA 


Fenners Rock 


Fenner's rocks are harmless creatures named 
for the xenobiologist Rivoc Fenner, who first 
stumbled over them (quite literally). Fenner’s 
rocks are small lichen, moss and algae eaters 
whose entire survival depends on camouflage. 
Their outer bodies are covered by a thick, rough 
skin which appears similar to the types of rock 
formations the creatures are inevitably found in 
(there are several different sub-species of Fetter's 
rocks, each with skin uniquely colored and tex- 
tured to match their native terrain). 

They have two small limbs for slow locomotion, 
but the creatures rarely move, and never swiftly. 
They will stay in roughly the same area for days on 
end, pouring over the rocks in the immediate area, 
looking for lichens and mosses for nourishment. 
They have acute senses of hearing, and upon hear- 
ing other animals approach, hold still — they can 
maintain their position for hours, if necessary. If, 
by chance, they are are discovered, Fenner’s rocks 
will open their jaws wide, baring a massive looking 
set of teeth while releasing a piercing screech. 
However, the teeth are purely for show — they are 
soft, cartilage growths that would be ineffective 
against a predatory animal (assuming the Fenner's 
rock would be able to move swiftly enough to bite, 
which is doubtful). 

Fenner’s rocks are believed to be largely silent 
animals — this is not true, Due to their hearing, 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


they can detect predators from quite a distance 
and cease their activities. However, observation 
by remote sensors has shown that groups of 
Fenner’s rocks often “sing” to each other, and the 
songs change depending upon the size of the 
group, availability of food, the weather and the 
season of the year. Scientists aren't sure exactly 
what function these communications serve. 

Fenner’s rocks have become a problem on 
some worlds where food is abundant and preda- 
tors are rare. They can multiply so quickly that 
within a season or two they can choke off natural 
waterways. In these massive numbers, they also 
produce high levels of certain dangerous strains 
of bacteria which have been known to infect 
animals and sentients. 


w Fenner’s Rock 
Type: Algae eater 
DEXTERITY 0D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH +2 
Special Abilities: 
Camouflage: Fenner's rocks look like natural rocks and get 
a bonus of +2D to remain hidden when creatures are 
wandering by. 
Screech: Fenner’s rocks use a piercing screech to attempt 
to scare away predators. 
Move: 1 
Size: Up to 25 centimeters across 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Bill Smith 


Ganjuko-Great Oopik 
a eS 


E Ganjuko-Great 


Oopik 


Ganjuko 


The ganjuko is a predator found throughout 
the arctic wastes of the Filve sector, although its 
genetic structure indicates that itis likely to have 
originated on the planet Fenn (presumably spread 
in pre-Republic times by explorers, colonists or 
the careless). These animals are also found on 
Bothawui, Kothlis and several other predomi- 
nantly Bothan planets. 

The large creature (upwards of three and a half 
meters tall and up to five meters long) is singularly 
designed for frigid climates, Massive layers of fat 
and thick, dark hair help it absorb and retain heat; 
a ganjuko is noticeably weakened within just a few 
hours of being exposed to above freezing tempera- 
tures. They have black, brown or darkred coloring, 
although their beaks and heads can range from red 
to a brilliant orange. 

The animals have incredibly hard external 


skull plates and beaks, which are reinforced with 
thickened layers of cartilage, providing it a po- 
tent offensive weapon in addition to offering 
excellent protection for the head and eyes. The 
beaks are often used to crack open the armor 
plates of prey, as well as for digging into ice. 
Ganjukos have retractable cartilage lids to pro- 
tect their eyes in combat, preferring to fight by 
scent and sound alone (this has come as an 
unpleasant surprise to many a safari hunter who 
had thought to stun the creatures with flash- 
grenades and similar pyrotechnics). Ganjukos 
are active during day and night periods, but take 
a number of brief “naps” during a normal plan- 
etary day/night cycle. Each ganjuko carves out a 
lair in the snow and ice sheets. 

Despite their immense mass, coming in at well 
over 600 kilograms, they move surprisingly fast. 
They can outrun most Humans, although their 


\ 

|! 
th 
į 


Ì1 S Detail of the Ganjuko’s hea 


Creatures of the Gala 


-WA 


SETA NOG et Oopik 


rs Sauk ore Oph 


Eyewitness Account 


It’s funny what a little perspective will do for you. 
I know those fancy xenobiologists have all kinds of 
fancy terms for animals. I have just two: dangerous 
and harmless. 

Unfortunately, there are an awful lot of critters that 
fit into that first category. Let me tell you about one of 
them that I had the pleasure of a “face-to-beak” with. 

Ganjukos. The Bothans have a lot of phrases to 
describe them, although most of them don’t translate 
to Basic since I can’t ripple my skin in time with the 
words. | just call "em big and nasty. 

I wasn't like some of those glamorous big-gamers 
who pay Bothan guides a stack of credit chips for the 
“privilege” of going after these monsters. | was a 
simple, shall we say, “businessman,” looking for a 
“discrete” place to do business. 

The details are irrelevant now — whether it was 
blasters or bootleg holos I can’t remember. All I know 
is my contact wants to meet in a valley a few clicks 
outta Fey’starn — it’s a small fishing village that gets 
a lot of traffic from boats. My contact figures with so 
many ships in and out, no one’s going to notice a few 
extra crates in the back of a cargo hold, especially if 
the ship’s captain gets a small bonus for his time. 

So, | agree to meet this Bothan cargo dealer out in 
the middle of nowhere, in this valley. Beautiful coun- 
try — clear sky, fresh air, mountains high as the 
buildings in the capital, and the whole place is cov- 
ered with ice and snow. Not a being around. 

The deal went down quickly — I get my money, and 
the Bothan and his cronies get their stuff. And, then, 
all ofasudden, his furry friends start rippling their fur. 
Not the normal, slight tussle you see mostly; they're 
just going nuts. I guessed these guys didn't play 
sabacc too often ... 

Anyway, my dealer starts getting jittering, doesn’t 
say too much, but his fur started rippling too. As his 
buddies are backing towards their skiff, I double-click 
my comlink, hoping my co-pilot catches on to the 
signal: “There’s trouble.” 

The Bothan dealer looks at me and says, “Smug- 


gler, you should leave soon. There will be problems.” 
Then, he starts backing up to his skiff. 

I figure I got my credits, and whatever is going on is 
probably not much of my business. Then, as I turn to 
head back toward my ship I notice what the problem 
is. It’s big, about twice as tall as I am, and heading for 
me fast as a scared dewback. Most times you're 
preoccupied with watching your “business partners” 
to make sure they don’t double-cross you — I didn’t 
think to watch out for local nasties thinking about 
lunch. 

This thing charges straight at me, letting out this 
high-pitched squeal. I know there’s no way I’m going 
to make it back to the ship, so I just try to dive out of 
the way. As I hit the snow, I catch a first whiff of it — 
it was a good thing I hadn't eaten in several hours — 
but that big tail catches me across the back. As I crash 
into the snow | can feel every vertebrae in my back 
shifting. I can’t see cause everything's gone all black, 
but that’s not such a big deal since I can’t feel my legs 
either. 

So, I figure I'll just lay in the snow and wait to be 
devoured — there weren't a lot of other options — 
when I hear the whine of the Bothans’ repulsor skiff. 
I open my eyes and try to look up. All I see is that big, 
nasty thing charging me, beak wide open. My heart 
stopped. And then, at least two or three blaster bolts 
bounced, and I mean bounced, off that thing's beak. 
Well, it didn't seem to cause any injury, but the thing 
sure stopped quick to find out who was shooting at it. 
Sure enough, it’s the Bothans. Well, | know I won't get 
a second chance, so Í try to stand up — I can even feel 
my legs now — and I run fast as | can for the ship. 

As we pulled up, Isaw the skiff pulling away, leaving 
that beastie far behind. I flipped the landing lights to 
let them, know I appreciated the assist ... and then 
checked to make sure my heart was beating again. 

Itell you what...I’ve faced slavers, duked it out with 
assassin droids, even run Imperial blockades ... but 
when I wake up at night in a cold sweat, what I see is 
that thing bearing down on me... 


bulk makes it difficult for them to turn and ma- 
neuver quickly. Ganjukos are solitary animals, 
each one controlling a fairly large amount of area 
(upwards of 200 square kilometers). They have 
few natural predators as adults; the hatchlings 
are almost helpless and they suffer a high mortal- 
ity rate due to other predators. 

Ganjukos can live up to 110 standard years 
old, but generally will only lay four to eight eggs 
in their lifetime. Their biology indicates a prima- 
rily avian heritage, but they share several marsu- 
pial characteristics, including a small pouch on 
the back where suckling young are kept until 
they are strong enough to fend for themselves 
(normally about three standard months). Young 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


ganjukos will remain with a parent for up to seven 
standard months. However, as soon as the young 
ganjuko begins showing signs of independence 
(for example, hunting on its own or straying far 
from the parent), young are cast out and forced 
to fend for themselves. 

Ganjukos have a deserved reputation for be- 
ing dangerous and easily angered animals. They 
are the subjects of numerous safari expeditions, 
but many new hunters underestimate their speed, 
cunning and ferocity —the ganjukos have claimed 
more than a few “trophies” themselves. Ganjuko 
beaks are often carved into highly prized and 
expensive dagger blades (which are quite popu- 
lar among wealthy Bothan clan leaders). 


w Ganjuko 
Type: Arctic predator 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Sneak 3D+1 
STRENGTH 4D 
Climbing/jumping 4D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Beak: STR+1D damage, digging skill at 5D, +1D to physical 
and energy to resist damage. 
Temperature Sensitivity: Ganjukos are extremely sensitive 
to temperature and are greatly weakened at temperatures 
above freezing. When exposed to temperatures higher 
than 5° Centigrade for more than one hour, reduce their 
Strength by -1D and their Move by -3; after one day, this 
penalty increases to -2D Strength and -10 for Move. After 


Sf ot 


dawg 
Té ES é 


E A Rodian ghest — the “Swamp Demon.” 


GanjUkO—Great Oopik s= 0 A Wes 


ARS 


more than one week in above freezing temperatures, they 
will slip into a hibernative state, which lasts until tempera- 
tures return to a more comfortable level. 

Move: 13 

Size: Up to 3.5 meters tall, up to 5 meters long 

Scale; Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Bill Smith 


Ghests 


Large reptilians that live in the swamps and 
bayous of Rodia, ghests — the fabled swamp 
demons — are an important facet of the mythol- 
ogy of the Rodians. While they normally prey on 
the larger herbivores of Rodia, there were times 
in Rodian history when it was not uncommon for 
a ghest to attack a primitive Rodian village, de- 
vouring all the inhabitants. Because of this, primi- 
tive Rodians believed that the ghests captured 
the spirits of the dead, and the appearance of a 
ghest was hailed as a warning of doom to come. 
Even now, ghests are often seen as demons in 
modern Rodian dramas. 

When searching for prey, ghests move slowly 
through the murky water, their eyes and fore- 
head just barely above the surface. When they 
spot something, they explode into motion, snap- 
ping with their teeth and claws, and normally 
consuming their prey in one bite. 

Ghest have no predators, but the primitive 
Rodians would, under certain circumstances, 
organize a ritual hunt, where a large number of 
the males would band together to hunt and killa 
ghest, The successful completion of such a hunt 
was believed to be a way of removing the curse of 
drought or famine. 

The ghest mating ritual appears to be half 
dance and half combat, as each member of the 
mating pair tries to prove that the other is a 
suitable mate (and only individuals that can hold 
their own in combat are suitable). Zoological 
behaviorists tell us that — even in the case of a 
mating pair — the desire of the ghests to repro- 
duce conflicts with their desire to prevent others 
from reproducing. However, they also note that 
the female will fight harder than the male, be- 
cause she knows that if she kills the male, she can 
still extract the sperm necessary for fertilization 
from the corpse, while the male knows that his 
offspring will not live unless the female does, 

After the mating, the pair will break apart and 
swim away from each other as fast as they can. 
This is an instinctive behavior that increases the 
chances that the male does not encounter his 
offspring again — because if he does encounter 
juveniles, he will kill and eat them. 

After the mating, the female lays hundreds of 
eggs inasmall pool and then begins protecting that 
pool. Most of the eggs grow into much smaller 
versions of the ghest, which then begin feeding on 
each other, ensuring that only the strongest sur- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—_IT! 
-WA 


vive to the pre-adult stage. These pre-adults then 
have to burrow into the mud, completely hiding 
themselves from the female. Only then will the 
female become disinterested and leave. If the pre- 
adults attempt to leave their pool before the female 
has left, she will probably eat them because she is 
not willing to take the chance that they may be the 
offspring of some other ghest. 

Because the fauna of Rodiaare being destroyed 
by rapid industrialization, the ghests are becom- 
ing extremely rare in their natural state (although 
a number of wealthy and sentimental Rodians 
have begun attempts totransplant juvenile ghests 
to other planets). 


m Ghest 
Type: Cartilaginous reptile 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 7D 
Special Abilities: 
Teeth: Do STR+2D damage. 
Claws: Do STR+1D damage. 
Move: 15 (swimming), 8 (walking) 
Size: 6 meters long 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Chuck Truett 


Glim Worm 


Glim worms are tunneling predators common 
to many different terrain types, althought they 
are prevalent in desert regions. Many different 
types are known across various worlds, but the 
most common is the “winding brown glim worm.” 
Growing up to one meter long, these tube-like 
creatures survive by hunting small rodents, rep- 
tiles, snakes, and insects. 

These animals are covered by flexible but 
sharp scales, which move in layers due to the 
contractions of the hard muscle underneath. 
Because of the complex muscle structure their 
skin seems to be continually “flowing,” as the 
muscle contractions power the creature’s move- 
ment, Glim worms are most notable for their 
subterranean movement—they are documented 
to be able to tunnel through loose sand and soils 
at a remarkable 40 kilometers per hour (in fact, 
their surface movement rate is slightly slower, at 
about 30 kilometers per hour). 

They tunnel at about a depth of one meter, 
periodically surfacing to use their remarkable 
vibration sensitivity to search out prey. When 
prey is found, they dive back underneath the 
ground, While tunneling, their movement is un- 
traceable (to surface creatures), but the glim 
worms skin can detect vibration of fleeing tar- 
gets, so the glim worm can track its food and 
burst up to the surface virtually on top ofits prey. 

Glim worms can capture animals through 
simple contact: if any part of the worm grazes the 
target, the glim worm’s muscles force the skin to 
flow out and contract around the prey. The glim 


E RN 


Ganjuko-Great Oopik 


no 
y SD À 
DEAR 

K Pea 


worm has countless glands underneathits scales 
and exudes an adhesive slime which assists in 
this effort. Then, the rippling skin “rolls” the 
creature to the glim worm’s mouth; food is eaten 
whole. 

Glim worms rely almost exclusively on their 
sense of touch and vibration for hunting: they 
have'no sense of vision or smell. Glim worms live 
about five to eight standard years, and lay one 
cache of 12 to 16 eggs per year, although these 
characteristics vary by the specific type of worm. 


EE Detail of the glim worm’s feeding mechanism. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


29 


30 


Glim worms are most often found in group of 
three to four animals. They do not present much 
of a threat to Humans, but they can be quite a 
shock to the unwary wilderness traveler, espe- 
cially when they burst to surface level to con- 
clude a hunt. 

On some worlds, glim worms are hunted fora 
variety of reasons. Their slime can be formulated 
into an inexpensive if somewhat weak adhesive, 
while scale-covered clothing is quite fashionable 
on some frontier planets. Glim worm meat is 
popular on some worlds; on other planets, glim 
worms are used to feed other meat bearing ani- 
mals. 


m= Glim Worm 
Type: Tunneling predator 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
Sneak 4D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Brawling: grappling 3D, digging 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Grappling Attack: Glim worms wrap their bodies around 
targets, trying to pull them to their mouth, This is an 
opposed brawling: grappling vs. brawling or Strength roll. 
Move: 10 (ground), 14 (burrowing) 
Size: Up to 1 meter long 
Scale: Creature 


Ulustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Bill Smith 


Gornt 


During the great war between the Alliance and 
the Empire, there were prizes far beyond weap- 
ons and ships; stolen mess supplies were, in their 
own way, important to the Alliance. An army, it 
was once said, travels on its stomach, and the 
Rebellion’s troops were no exception. Living more 


ARS 


often than not on stale rations scavenged from 
old depots, Rebel soldiers were delighted when a 
new kind of meat was added to the Imperial 
military menu. Sweet, juicy and nutritious, this 
new packed meat quickly became a favorite of 
troops on both sides of the war. Few Rebels could 
imagine that the source of this new delicacy was, 
in fact, the squat, ugly gornt, an omnivore native 
to the planet Hethar. Fewer still would really 
care. 

When the Empire annexed Hethar, the local 
colonists offered a staple of their own diets to 
Imperial suppliers. This staple — gornt meat — 
could go for long periods without spoiling, tasted 
good and had high nutritional value. As this new 
food was cheaply and easily procured, the Impe- 
rial Navy quickly instituted a gornt breeding and 
processing program. A few enterprising 
Sullustans set up ranches and made deals; wild 
gornts were rounded up, fattened and bred to 
provide food for naval supplies. Several lucky 
Imperial suppliers got commissions and the 
Sullustan ranchers grew rich. 

After years of forced breeding, the general 
quality of the stock has declined, breeding rates 
have slowed, and genetic codes have been con- 
torted by endless tampering. Farmers are aware 
of the declining number and quality of their 
herds, but can do little about it. 

In their wild state, gornts travel in packs of 
between 10 and 30 adults, with about half as 
many young “gorntlings.” Herbivorous by na- 
ture, gornts may, ina pinch, eat almost anything. 
An extremely efficient digestive system breaks 
down even the toughest of foods — bone, gristle, 
tree bark, shell — into prime nutrients. Because 


ORRE 
SESE ati iaia 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—STA 
-WA 


of this, gornt meat is succulent and nutritious, 
Gornt bodies are thick and meaty, and even their 
bones can be easily broken down into vitamin 
supplements. They are simple creatures, with 
little apparent purpose beyond eating, sleeping 
and breeding. They would seem, therefore, to be 
the ideal food stock. 

The average gornt’s lifespan, under natural 
conditions, is six standard years. During this 
time, gornts mate three times. Their fertility rate 
is high, but their genetic balance is delicate. 
Stress, disease or medical tampering greatly re- 
duces the chances of live birth. Gornt ayas (pups) 
are born alive, often in litters of two to four. 
These pups must be tended by their mothers for 
the first year of their lives until they can fend for 
themselves. This delicate reproductive balance 
has prevented the omnivorous gornt from strip- 
ping the forests bare — but now that the gornts 
are being harvested more quickly than they can 
breed, the species is dwindling. 

The average gornt eats its weight in food per 
standard week. Because the Sullustan ranchers 
can feed their stock almost anything, food sup- 
plies have not been a great problem. With the 
changing diet, however, comes an altered breed- 
ing cycle — a cycle Imperial breeders and 
Sullustan ranchers have been unable to adjust. 
Various chemical and genetic treatments have 
only reduced gornt fertility rates. Several high- 
ranking supply officers have staked fortunes on 
the gornts’ survival. Imperial geneticists, drawn 
to the challenge, have traveled to Hethar and 
other outlying gornt breeding planets, attempt- 
ing to find a solution to the declining gornt repro- 
ductive rate. The scientist that could discover a 
breakthrough stands to make many friends anda 
healthy profit. 

Some Rebel sympathetic farmers have pur- 
chased gornt breeding stock, attempting to raise 
their own herds. 


m Gornt 
Type: Meat animal 
DEXTERITY 1D+2 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Special Abilities: 
Bite; Does STR+2 
Move: 6 
Size: 1 meter long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Phil Brucato 


Graiveh 


Developmental sentientologists — who study 
the process through which species achieve sen- 
tience — are all in agreement that the graiveh are 
nearing the end of their journey towards intelli- 
gence. However, since this journey began hun- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


yy 


bg 


dreds of thousands of years in the past, its end may 
yet be thousands of years in the future. In the 
meantime, sentientologists and zoological behav- 
iorists are both carefully studying these tall, furred 
humanoids in hopes that the process of their 
development will yield clues that aid in the under- 
standing of the behaviors of the sentients and non- 
sentients that populate the galaxy of today. 

The graiveh live in the forests and grasslands 
of the temperate planet of Ealor, in the Bysis 
system. The herd families (numbering 34 to 40 
individuals) are currently exhibiting territorial 
bunting behaviors that are often thought to be a 
necessary precursor to the development of primi- 
tive methods of animal husbandry. 

The graiveh also exhibit a number of altruistic 
behaviors, of which their hunting strategy is one. 
Only the strongest and healthiest of the adults 
leave the herd to hunt. The juveniles, the elders 
and any who are wounded or weakened by illness 


Ganjuko-—Great Oopik 


ROA 
Nee 


—_ 
5 o7 


stay in the nesting area. Successful hunters, both 
male and female, bring their prey back to the 
nesting area, where it is shared equally among all 
the members of the herd. 

The graiveh primarily consume tantlas, supple- 
menting their diets with the eggs of the large 
avian species of Ealor and small amounts of 
vegetation, They hunt at night, but rarely gain the 
benefit of surprise, due to the large amount of 
noise that they make while traveling through the 
forest, Instead, the graiveh owe their success as 
hunters to their ability to make leaping attacks, 
which often bring down their prey in one stroke. 

Another altruistic behavior exhibited by the 
graiveh becomes apparent inthoserareinstances 
in which the herd is attacked. When this occurs, 
the eldest graiveh will stand and fight while the 
others run, risking their lives so that the healthi- 
est members of the herd may escape. 

Graiveh mate for life, and their families form 
herds that stay together for many generations. 
Unless there have been premature deaths, each 
herd will consist of an equal number of males and 
females, because the graiveh invariably give birth 


E A Great Oopik. 


Ganjuko-Great OO pik mamma anaes fk ees 


ARS 


to twins — one male and one female. 

When the juvenile twin pairs reach maturity, 
both leave the family and begin searching for 
another pair of juvenile graiveh. When two pairs of 
graiveh twins meet, they form two mating pairs, 
one of which returns to each family group. Except 
for this exchange of juveniles (necessary to allow 
for genetic diversity), graiveh family herds are 
extremely territorial. Rogue graiveh (individuals 
from broken herds, or juveniles whose twins have 
died prematurely) are not accepted into any family 
herds, and seldom live long. 

Graiveh nesting sites are normally large clear- 
ings (40 meters or more in diameter) that are 
marked by a number of shallow pits filled with 
vegetation. These pits are the nests in which the 
graiveh sleep during the day. Despite the fact that 
the graiveh have no predators, there is always one 
graiveh who remains awake during the day, watch- 
ing for danger while the others sleep. 

It is currently a violation of Imperial law to kill 
or otherwise remove a graiveh from Ealor, but 
they are still occasionally found in illegal re- 
search stations and in unlicensed zoos and trav- 
eling carnivals, 

Imperial law does not, in fact, absolutely for- 
bid the capture or destruction of graiveh. Few 
beings — other than legal scholars — realize that 
it allows for a number of exceptions, especially in 
cases regarding research that is performed for 
the benefit of the Empire. In addition, anumber of 
sentientologists have suggested that the Empire 
may have begun a breeding program in an at- 
tempt to breed a more intelligent but extremely 
docile graiveh for use as slave labor. 


m Graiveh 
Type: Presentient humanoid carnivore 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Melee combat 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 3D+1 
Brawling 6D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Claws: Do STR+1D damage. 
Leaping Attack: Graiveh often use a leaping attack when 
hunting, traveling up to 10 meters in a single movement. 
When using this attack, the graiveh add +2D totheir melee 
combat or brawling skill. If this attack is successful, it does 
STR+3D damage. 
Eyesight: Graiveh have extremely sensitive eyesight and 
gain a +2D bonus on all Perception tasks involving sight. 
Move: 12 
Size: 2.5 meters tall 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Chuck Truett 


Great Oopik 


The “great oopik” of Paramatan is a modern 
day relic of its homeworld’s by-gone age. An 
evolutionary cross between native reptilian and 
avian life forms, oopiks were thought to have 
died out over a million years ago. Few believed 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


TE y o SSS men —_————_—EE—_—EE———E—EEE SSS aS Ganjuko-Great Oopik 


SS a uuo 


any had survived until, in the last decade, small 
clutches of oopiks have been discovered in re- 
mote forests on the southern continent of Grxy. 

Despite its being a flightless bird, oopiks live a 
large portion of their lives in the cover of 
Paramatan fruit trees. In this regard, the oopik’s 
hook claws at each end ofits leathery wings serve 
as an aid in maneuvering from limb to limb, The 
surviving oopiks nest in the treetops, using height 
as a primary defense against would-be robbers, 
while their eggs are warmed by the sunlight that 
penetrates the upper forest limbs. Oopiks dine 
on small forest creatures, using a highly devel- 
oped ultrasound echoing system to pinpoint 
quarry. Once located and identified, the oopik 
will drop down upon the unsuspecting creature, 
holding it fast with its claws, while emitting an 
intense sound burst to stun the victim into un- 
consciousness, 

While to date there is no evidence to suggest 
oopiks pose any threat to Humanoid life forms, 
not much is known about them. Of particular 
interest is the faintly phosphorescent membrane 
sack located in the center of the oopik’s torso. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


m Great Oopik 
Type: Flightless avian-reptile 
DEXTERITY 1D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 5D 
STRENGTH 1D+2 
Climbing/jumping 5D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Sonic Motion Detection; Oopiks are all but blind in normal 
light. They locate and track prey through the constant use 
of ultrasonic waves reflected back to especially adapted 
aural receivers located behind the eye cavities. This gives 
them unusually keen hunting skills. This is reflected in 
their Perception and search totals. 
Sonic Stun: Oopiks can project a short range cone of 
intensely powerful ultrasonic waves capable of stunning 
prey into submission, At close range, the oopik can use 
this ability to project a 45 degree forward arc of concen- 
trated vibrations doing 4D stun damage (range up to five 
meters). 
Claws: Foot and wing hook claws do STR+2 damage 
Tail: Tailswipe does STR+1 damage 
Move: 8 (walking), 10 (climbing in tree limbs) 
Size: 1-1.3 meters tall, up to 2-meter wingspan 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Rick D, Stuart 


33 


Helas-Humbaba 


ARS 


fa Helas-Humbaba 


Helas 


Variously known as “flying eels” or “air snakes,” 
helas are long, serpentine amphibians that use a 
biologically generated repulsorlift field to “swim” 
through the moist atmosphere of Enaleh. 

Like many aquatic animals, helas are filter 
feeders. However, instead of swimming through 
liquid, the helas fly through the moist atmo- 

sphere of Enaleh, their mouths open wide, 
capturing thousands of tiny, flying 
insects every hour. 
The only social 


behavior that helas exhibit is that of schooling. 
Helas are never found as individuals. Instead 
they are always part of a large group (usually 
numbering approximately 100 individuals). While 
these “schools” of helas provide a limited amount 
of social interaction, they are primarily a defen- 
sive mechanism. 

The main predators of the helas are the slards, 
large, quadrupedal felines that live in the Enaleh 
grasslands. The slards prey on helas by leaping 
out of their hiding places in the grasses and up 
into the air (sometimes leaping as far as four 
meters vertically), and capturing a hela as it flies 
above. The hela schools lessen the effectiveness 
of this method of attack by providing the slards 
with an overwhelming number of targets. There- 
fore, only one or two helas will fall while the rest 
of the school goes on. As a corollary to this, 
individual helas that become separated from 
their school (usually only the weak or old) are 
easily targeted by the attacks of the slards. 

With the exception of the aquatic environ- 
ment that is necessary for their embryonic devel- 
opment, helas spend their entire lives in the air. 
Most of this time is spent over the grasslands, but 
once during every local year, the helas gather 
above the lakes and freshwater seas to perform 
their reproductive behaviors. 

Fertilization begins when the female helas fly 
over the water, very near the surface, and expel 
large numbers of eggs, which forma thick, yellow 
mass that covers much of the surface of the lake. 
The females then fly up into the sky and begin 
performing a complex series of aerial maneu- 

vers. These maneuvers trigger the mating 

behavior of the males, who begin diving 

repeatedly into the water, filling the water 
with gametes. The acid of the gametes combines 
with carbonic compounds located in the silt that 
rests at the bottom of the lake, initiating the 
release of large amounts of carbon dioxide. As a 
result, the lake which the helas are using for their 
breeding grounds temporarily becomes a boiling 
soup — this mechanical action facilitates the 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—STA 
-WA 


fertilization of eggs. In addition, the sudden in- 
crease in carbon dioxide ensures that the lake 
will be filled with plant life for the embryonic 
helas to use as food. 

Helas are notable for certain strange behav- 
iors which are precipitated by the operation of 
mechanical repulsorlift generators. Helas have 
the ability to sense repulsorlift fields over long 
distances and are inexplicably drawn to them. 
Once the helas have located the field, they will 
perform one of two behaviors. They will either 
adopt the device that is generating the field into 
their school, swimming through the air with it 
and matching its every movement, or they will 
attack the device with their small but extremely 
sharp teeth, 

Helas are rarely found on planets other than 
Enaleh. Smaller specimens have been exported 
and used in aeroquaria, but the helas are rela- 
tively fragile creatures, and these captive speci- 
mens live short lives and rarely breed. Periodi- 
cally, someone attempts to start large scale farm- 
ingand breeding of the helas, and these farms are 
often successful (and profitable) for a short time, 
but they almost always fail after a few seasons. 

Many scientists have attempted to locate and 
examine the organ which allows the helas to 
generate their repulsorlift field, but none have 
been successful. However, a number of smug- 
glers have found that they can supplement their 
incomes by providing helas to any of anumber of 
research institutions. 


w Hela 
Type: Aeroreal amphibian 
DEXTERITY 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 1D+1 
Flight 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Repulsorlift Sense: Helas are extremely sensitive to the 
fields produced by repulsorlift generators. If such equip- 
ment is used, all helas within a 2 kilometer radius will be 
drawn to the generators. 
Teeth: Do STR+2 damage. 
Move: 150 
Size: 2 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design; Chuck 
Truett 


Herlixx 


As a hunter primarily concerned with fish and 
small amphibians, the herlixx are a most unusual 
breed of amphibious predator. While excellent 
swimmers in their own right, these residents of 
Kasiol’s third planet spend an equal amount of 
time on land in the plentiful swamps. Their long 
forearms aid them in moving from tree to tree, 
and dropping down from overhanging branches 
into the water on unsuspecting prey. When not 
swinging through forest canopies, the average 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


herlixx is a surface feeder, using its thick depos- 
its of fat to float just below the water's surface or 
using its long toes to grasp on to vines and 
branches while the arms try to capture food. It 
also uses its feet like paddles, skimming across 
marsh or river tributatires in search of food. It 
normally hunts during early morning hours when 
competition with other predators is slight; it 
often rests during afternoons, making it an easy 
target for daytime hunters. 

Despite their somewhat frightening appear- 
ance, thereis no recorded instance of any herlixx 
ever attacking a sapient resident of the planet. 
Often, when they encounter colonists, the reac- 
tion is a mixture of curiousity and fear — they will 
flee the settlers at the slightest unusual sound or 
sudden movement. 


m Herlixx 
Type: Swampland omnivore 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D+1 
Climbing/jumping 5D+1, swimming 5D+1 
Move: 9 (land), 12 (water) 
Size: 40-50 centimeters tall 


Illustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Rick D, Stuart 


Helas-Humbaba 


Hitcher Crab 


The crustacean known as the “hitcher crab” is 
an important source of food for the scavengers, 
nomads and farmers of the wilderness regions of 
Sevarcos (see “The Free-Trader’s Guide to 
Sevarcos,” pages 62-92 of Star Wars Adventure 
Journal, Volume 1, Number 2). 

While it has a hard, spiked outer shell, and 
dangerous claws for defense, the animal under- 
neath is a nutritious (if somewhat gamey) food 
source and several large water sacs give success- 
ful hunters important supplies of water on the 
barren planet. 

Hitcher crabs grow upwards of one and a third 
meters long, and full grown adults (about 15 
standard years old) can present quite a chal- 
lenge to even seasoned hunters; there are stories 
of encounters with hitcher crabs nearly four 
meters across, but most locals on Sevarcos at- 
tribute these stories to an overactive imagina- 
tion. 

Hitcher crabs are active during both day and 
night, and spend their time prowling the desert 
plains and canyons for outcroppings of plant life 
and small rodents. When frightened, however, 
they can move quite quickly, outpacing most 
Humans. They are least dangerous during the 
height of the summer seasons, as the intense 
temperatures force even these hardy creatures 
to burrow into the sand for protection from the 
heat. When buried, their bodily functions slow 
substantially, and hunters have a much easier 
time of subduing these animals. Unfortunately, 
when buried in this manner, the hitcher crabs are 
much harder to spot and many careless animals 
(and people) have walked right over the crabs — 
leading to, more often than not, a brutal and 
painful death. 

Hitcher crabs produce a slow acting poison 
which coats their claws; it also coats their shell 
spikes, but is much less concentrated in this 

area. While quite effective 
on smaller prey, it is 
merely painful to 


most Humans 
(provided they 
receive 


oe ò 5 
P 


Helas-Humbaba Ee SSS), | = 
Se ne EE || 


ARS 


medical treatment within an hour of being 
slashed); a small number of individuals have 
proven to be quite allergic to the toxin, however, 
so caution is recommended when near these 
animals. 

They are often found in same sex pairs. During 
mating season, a male and female pair join, effec- 
tively forming a pack. This pack remains together 
through the gestation period (about three weeks), 
egg laying phase (a female normally produces 
four to eight eggs per season) and the hatching, 
about nine standard weeks after the eggs are 
released. Hitcher crabs bury their eggs in the 
sand. When the young hatch, the females split off 
with the female pair while the males are raised by 
the adult males. Biologists have not determined 
any clear biological reason for this, but they have 
noted that the behavior of male and female pairs 
is virtually indistinguishable. 


ms Hitcher Crab 
Type: Desert forager 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 1D+2 
STRENGTH 1D 
Special Abilities: 
Shell: Adds +1D to resist damage from energy and +2D to 
resist damage from physical attacks. 
Claws; Do STR+1D damage 
Poison: Does 2D+2 damage (on claws) or 1D+2 damage (on 
Shell) 
Water Sacs: Hitcher crabs have large water sacs to store 
water for harsh desert conditions 
Move: 12 
Size: 1.3 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Bill Smith 


Humbaba 


In the forests of Kashoon, good camouflage or 
brute strength means the difference between 
survival and extinction. For the massive 
humbabas, these traits have ensured both their 
existence and their place in legend. 

After the Empire conquered Kashoon, the na- 
tive Kashoonara rebelled, only to be brutally put 
down. With a series of guerilla assaults, the Alli- 
ance helped free Kashoon and left the savage 
humanoids to their own devices. The humbabas 
were essential in that war effort. 

Ancient Kashoonara folklore portrays the 
humbaba as the steed of Hurrungat, bringer of 
twilight. Hurrungat, it is said, rode from the un- 
derworld to bind the day and night to- 

gether into morning and dusk. Hecame 

forth slowly, riding upon a giant 

humbaba, a good six Kashoonara 
tall at the shoulder. 

Areal humbaba, it should benoted, 

is much smaller, typically about two 

meters or so at the shoulder. Despite its 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


a T AR Helas-Humbaba 
EN a 


-WA 


great bulk, the humbaba moves fairly quickly. Its 
claws, though dull, are large and designed to dig 
through dirt, rock and mud. Its prehensile snout 
functions as both a limb and a sensory organ. 
Hurrungat could have chosen worse for a mount. 

A natural burrower, the humbaba prefers soft 
swampland to the harder soil of Kashoon’s for- 
ests. Nevertheless, four distinct species have 
evolved from humbaba migrations across the 
planet. Two variations thrivein the soggy swamps 
of the southern continent, while a third inhabits 
the thick and dangerous forests and a fourth 
tunnels beneath the ice and snow of Kashoon’s 
poles. 

Like their legendary rider, humbabas sleep 
beneath the ground (or marsh, or snow) during 
the day, emerging at twilight to forage. Though 
not strictly solitary, they do not gather into groups 
of more than five. Their rumbling cries dissuade 
many predators from attacking, although large 
forest hunters do feed regularly on the massive 
omnivores. 

Humbabas are not without protection; their 
speed is surprising and their teeth can do serious 
damage if the beast manages to grab a good hold 
on a target. Because of their size and strength, 
humbabas are difficult to hurt. If all else fails, a 
humbaba can simply rear up and land on an 
attacker, mashing it flat. 

Ahumbaba’s “nose” is actually prehensile and 
surprisingly strong. The rough knobs along its 
shaft allow it to grip and hold objects, although 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


such a grasp is clumsy at best. Some humbabas 
are rumored to usesimple tools with their trunks, 
but most simply break obstacles or brush aside 
debris with them. In combat, a humbaba can 
swing its trunk like a flexible mace, battering 
nearby targets, or grab a foe and drag it down for 
agood solid bite. Despite these impressive weap- 
ons, humbabas rarely instigate a fight. 

The earth-toned fur of the humbaba provides 
an excellent form of camouflage; the snow-bound 
variety tends towards bluish-white hues, while 
the swamp-dwellers’ coats reflect the many col- 
ors of their homes. Debris from burrowing clings 
to a humbaba’s fur, blending it further into its 
surroundings. As the humbaba usually walks 
abroad at night, the beast is rarely seen unless it 
wants to be. 

Despite their great size and obvious food po- 
tential, humbabas have never been hunted in the 
recorded history of Kashoon; the Kashoonara 
regard them as sacred and will even defend them 
against off-worlders. Manyastormtrooper is said 
to have regretted shooting a humbaba during the 
Imperial occupation. Nevertheless, a great many 
humbabas fell to blasters before the Imperials 
were driven from Kashoon. The remaining beasts, 
though far from endangered, have become more 
reclusive (or aggressive) since the Empire's inva- 
sion. Visitors to Kashoon are advised to avoid 
humbabas; the customs of the Kashoonara pro- 
tect these beasts more powerfully than any ar- 
mor. 


ws Humbaba 


Type: Lumbering beast 

DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Lifting 5D 

Special Abilities: 

Trunk: Does STR+1D damage; can grab, push or crush. 
Armor: Humbaba’s have thick hides to help protect them 
from damage; they get +2D to resist physical and energy 
attacks. 

Bite: Does STR +1D+1 damage. 

Claw: Do STR +2 damage. 

Concealment: Because of coloration and clinging bits of 
stuff, humbabas get + 2D to sneak when hiding. 

Move: 12 

Size: 2 meters tall at the shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Orneriness: 2D 


Mustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Phil Brucato 


Helas-Humbaba enn 8 A Peers 
—————_—_—_—_——— |, 


ARS 


The Twilight Chant 


O noble Hurrungat 

Darkness calls, twilight falls 

Across our world, across our tribes 

Lead us then into the night 

Of teeth and eyes and anger grave 

Upon your steed Aarwynn, first humbaba 

Of the sacred line born beneath the Tree- 
Queen's fingers. 


Great Hurrungat 
The breezes cry for our lands 
Crushed beneath the Tyrant’s fist 


Great Aarwynn 

Bear our twilight from us 
Deliver us into angry darkness 
Before the coming of the sun. 


20 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—ITA 
"WA 


E ibliton—Ludos 


Ibliton 


Inthe swamps of Randorn 2, the ibliton stands 
at the top of the food chain and occupies a 
significant role in local mythology. The native 
population, a Humanoid race called the Mizx, 
regard the ibliton as an avatar of Hershoon the 
Destroyer, whose corruption extends beyond 
his death. The Destroyer, itis said, used powerful 
magicks as he lay dying, conjuring aspects of his 
own demented soul. The resulting creatures, the 
ibliton, supposedly continue Hershoon’s legacy. 

Ibliton have earned their dire reputation; three 
published accounts speak of ibliton raids on 
Mizx villages. Because of the creatures’ great 
strength and hard shells, the primitive weapons 
of the Mizx have little effect against them. Al- 
though ibliton have no measurable intelligence, 
they appear to destroy for destruction’s own 
sake. Meslinger of the Tyberious Institute speaks 
of an ibliton that pulled a Mizx cottage apart to 
get at the natives inside. According to this tale, 
the monster “seemingly took its time, savoring 
the devastation it caused and the terror it evoked.” 
The polished shell deflected several blaster bolts 
before the researchers were able to put the crea- 
ture down. Their efforts saved all but one of the 
villagers, and Meslinger describes the funeral 
with great detail. The Mizx, it seems, have ban- 
ishing rituals to cleanse the souls of beings killed 
by the Destroyer’s pawns. A Mizx whose soul is 
not so consecrated becomes another ibliton 
accoring to their mythology. 

The truth, from a xenobiologist’s view, is less 
fantastic. Ibliton appear to predate the Mizx civili- 
zation (such as it is) by thousands of years. Re- 
searchers from the Tyberious Institute of 
Xenobiology have dredged millennia-old ibliton 
shells from Randorn’s swamps. Judging by the 
fossil record, the cephalopod-crustacean hybrids 
appear to have existed as long as 600,000 standard 
years ago. No ancestor species, however, has been 
discovered as of yet. The theory, put forth by 
Harzoon Parr of the Galactic History Foundation, 


that iblitons were “planted” on Randorn 2 by some 
lost starfaring race have interested xenobiologists 
but remain pure speculation. 

An ibliton’s shell grows as the creature itself 
does, coiling over its “owner's” head, protecting 
the soft inner body from predators and harsh 
swamp conditions. Highly acidic digestive chemi- 
cals, secreted through the ibliton’s pores, polish 


Ibliton—Ludos 


` V) - 
we A 

UILL ta, 

INU fy, 

(EAM. 

CIV iim E 


paauga": 
: WU i a 


SQ RSS f 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


39 


the shell to an almost reflective sheen; this sheen 
allows the creature to deflect low-powered blaster 
bolts. The globular eyes lie behind a thin hard 
film composed of the same materials that make 
up the shell. A chemical within the eyes keeps the 
shell from solidifying over the eye sockets, al- 
though some blinded specimens have been dis- 
covered. 

The ibliton’s segmented legs, covered in 
chitonous exoskeleton armor, end in thin blades 
that allow the creature to pick its way through 
the swamp, cutting through obstacles in its path. 
The four tentacles, located beneath the head, 
grasp the ibliton’s prey and drag it into a large 
circular maw, which is ringed with sharp grind- 
ing teeth. These tentacles, the only part of the 
creature not armored in some way, are strong 
but still vulnerable to attack. Native weapons can 
cut through them with some difficulty and they 
offer little resistance to a vibro-blade. This soft 
tissue can, however, regenerate at a frightening 
rate. Severed tentacles have been know to re- 
grow in less than a week— small wonder the Mizx 
consider the ibliton to be some incarnation of 
evil. 

Ibliton reproduce asexually; each creature 
carries a clutch of eggs — usually a dozen, some- 
times more — within its body. These eggs work 
their way up through the beast, from the deepest 
coil out through an organ beneath the mouth. 
One egg per standard year works its way out, to 
be deposited in the swamp waters. The waters 
activate fertilization compounds in the egg, and 
life begins. These eggs — the beginnings of the 
newborn ibliton’s shell — protect the soft inner 
creature from many environmental hazards. As 
the ibliton grows, the eggshell grows with it. This 
process takes over 10 standard years, and many 
ibliton perish before they reach maturity. Surviy- 
ing adults, however, are the undisputed rulers of 
the swamp. No other beast of the Randorn bay- 
ous can defeat a full-grown ibliton. 

Although small fish and rodents make up the 
majority of an ibliton’s diet, the predators are not 
averse to adding larger beings to the menu. Mizx 
children learn at an early age not to venture into 
the swamps. Large avians and reptiles are com- 
mon fodder as well; some ibliton have been known 
to raid Mizx stock pens, carrying off domesti- 
cated layalls or hecxts. Many Mizx villagers plant 
a caustic weed, harrowbane, near their pens. 
Ibliton, they claim, cannot cross borders pro- 
tected by this sacred plant. Interestingly enough, 
harrowbane actually burns ibliton tentacles; the 
predators thus avoid this plant out of instinctive 
fear. 

Because of their ungainly bulk and size, ibliton 
are fairly slow. Their reach, however, extends 
nearly three meters from their bodies. Some 


Ibliton—Ludos eee eS) a 
SS ee ee a, 


ARS 


even pull themselves along through difficult ter- 
rain by grasping nearby objects with their ten- 
tacles. The raw cunning that some explorers 
have observed in their subjects indicates that 
these swamp killers may be capable of complex 
thought. Although the small size of ibliton brains 
seems to contradict this theory, there is still 
some room for doubt. These mythological incar- 
nations of destruction might pose a real threat if 
the species were to expand beyond the remote 
confines of Randorn 2. 


m Ibliton 
Type: Swamp hazard 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 5D 
Special Abilities: 
Entangling: Iblitons may snare an opponent with several 
tentacles by scoring a Difficult hit with their brawling skill. 
An opponent thus tangled has its Dexterity reduced by-2D 
and cannot move until it gets free of the creature's grasp. 
Breaking free requires an opposed Strength roll; the char- 
acter must succeed by six or more points to break free, 
Armor: An ibliton'’s armor covers its head and body, 
adding +2D to resist damage. 
Leg Claws: Do STR+1D damage. 
Move: 8 
Size: 2 meters long (5 meters Ing with tentacles) 


illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design; Phil Brucato 


Kalaides 


Kalaides are small mollusks that have become 
of prime economic importance to the planet 
Cols. These small animals are found in great 
numbers in their native region. They seldom 
exceed two centimeters in length. Kalaides are 
soft, vulnerable animals that propel themselves 
by a series of flagellum; their primary sense 
organs are a series of sensitive “whiskers” near 
the mouth. 

Their native waterways have a complex 
biostructure, with countless fish, amphibian, and 
crustacean species. Kalaides themselves tend to 
have a lifespan of only a few months, but also 
reproduce rapidly — an area nearly depleted of 
them can have a population numbering in the 
tens of thousands within just a few months pro- 
vided the environmental balance remains favor- 
able. However, that is the problem — the crea- 
tures have proven to be very susceptible to 
changes in their environment and without ideal 
conditions, their reproduction rate slows alarm- 
ingly. 

The environmental! controls around their na- 
tive region are strict, but with good reason. As 
the kalaides seem to be extremely sensitive to 
changes in their environment, the government of 
Cols will not risk destroying the biosphere that 
gaverise tothem. In addition to bans on industry, 
any activity which may result in chemicals enter- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


CR TT eee eee Ibliton—Ludos 
ee a aA 


-WA 


A Small Creature’s Immense Importance 


From promotional materials of the Cols 
Kalaides Harvesters Guild ... 

Upon first glance, most of you would never 
think that this humble animal, the kalaide, has 
been responsible for saving millions of lives 
around the galaxy. Now you will know the 
truth behind this remarkable creature. 

Kalaides are found only within the natural 
sea-water harbors of Harvest Bay, on the planet 
Cols; efforts to transplant the animals to other 
worlds have failed. Due to the very limited envi- 
ronment in which this valuable animal can sur- 
vive, no industry has been permitted within a 
500 kilometer radius of Harvest Bay for over 
5,000 years. Still, the humble invertebrate has 
been an economic benefit to this world, not a 
burden. And one cannot put a price on the lives 
saved by this amazing animal. 

Kalaides sweep the bottoms ofthe harbors of 


ingthe biosphere is banned or strictly controlled. 
Therefore, the entire local economy is regulated. 
All waste must be removed by licensed contrac- 
tors; businesses and residences are regularly 
monitored for pollution levels; the use of ve- 
hicles, droids and machinery is prohibited on the 
waterways. 

The result is a region where prices are much 
higher than the norm, government officials wield 
enormous power (since they grant business, 
operation and building permits for the entire 
region), and many services that galactic citizens 
take for granted are not available. However, the 
Harvest Bay area is warm and lush, with an 
extremely comfortable climate; the region has 
become a “tourist area,” and the income supple- 
ments the kalaides harvesting operations. 

The harvesting operations are much more 
dangerous than is admitted by local officials. The 
abundance of kalaides and other small aquatic 
animals draws many predatory fish to the waters 
of Harvest Bay. Harvesting must be done by 
divers with portable equipment, and harvesters 
risk attacks by the more aggressive fish and 
water creatures. Local harvesting companies look 
totransient travelers (suchas academy students) 
as a source of potential employees. 


Kalaide. Dexterity OD, Perception OD, Strength 
0D. Move: 1. 


Red Mionts 


Red mionts are one of the more dangerous fish 
species known to frequent the waters of Harvest 
Bay. Their primary prey are smaller fish and 
aquatic species (including kalaides), but they 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


Harvest Bay, consuming many forms of bacte- 
ria, as well as microscopic algae and plants. 
They have a unique gland that uses specific 
nutrients to create masrizeen, a chemical com- 
pound kalaides use to spur fertile periods in 
their reproductive cycle, However, scientists 
used masrizeen as the basis for the first effective 
antidote for the lethal Jurrinex6 and Jurr-5 hive 
viruses, which were responsible for over 100 
million deaths in the past four centuries. De- 
spite intensive research efforts, scientists have 
not been able to synthesize a replacement for 
masrizeen, nor have they been able to trans- 
plant kalaides beyond their natural habitat. While 
modern incidents of these two hive viruses have 
been cut dramatically thanks to the antidote, 
they still remain a dangerous threat to public 
health, and so research on masrizeen contin- 
ues, 


[bliton—Ludos 


Adventure Hook: Biological 
Terrorism 


The kalaides, and the masrizeen indus- 
try based on their unique biology, can be 
the basis for a novel adventure hook. A 
group of “biological terrorists” are threat- 
ening to poison Harvest Bay and then un- 
leash the Jurrinex6 hive virus on unsus- 
pecting worlds unless their demands for 
millions of credits are met. The characters 
might be Rebel Alliance operatives sent to 
stop this from happening, but there is the 
added complication that any Imperial teams 
sent to stop the terrorists could mistake the 
Rebels for the terrorists. 

The adventure could involve an elabo- 
rate undercover operation whereby the 
Rebels must assume convincing fake identi- 
ties and search the towns around Harvest 
Bay for the terrorists. The characters may 
be doubly motivated by the prospect of a 
reward from Imperial officials for the appre- 
hension of these loathesome beings. 

The adventure might also take on amore 
personal matter: the terrorists have released 
the virus on a small colony world where 
perhaps one of the characters’ relatives 
lives. 


have been known to attack Human-sized beings. 
They are easily recognizable by their bright red 
coloring. They are a favored dish amongst the 
restaurants of the area, 


Red Miont. Dexterity 1D, Perception 2D, Strength 
1D. Special abilities: Bite (STR+2 damage). Move: 
8. 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Bill Smith 


Keejin (Cave Crawler) 


From Yavin 4 to the deepest caves of Thila, the 
scavenging keejin has provided harmless scares 
to countless scouts, soldiers and technicians in 
the deep caves of thousands of worlds. 

Keejin are deep-earth dwellers, spending their 
entire existence scuttling through caves and cav- 
erns. Prospectors have even reported finding 
them inside huge living organisms, like large 
space slugs or miner's horrors. An odd filtration 
system enables them to breathe normally in most 
environments, and one sub-species even thrives 
in the vacuum of space. They hatch from eggs 
which resemble plastic tablets and reach matu- 
rity in six standard years. Also known as “cave 
crawlers,” keejin seem separated into two dis- 
tinct genders; procreation involves group gath- 
erings followed by brief bonding. Keejin appear 


to be otherwise solitary, although mated pairs 
have been encountered if there are hatchlings 
about. When settlers of any kind move into a 
cavern complex, resident keejin quickly leave. 

Cave crawlers pick their way slowly across 
cave walls and ceilings with their claws and tails. 
The distinct cracking scrape they make as they 
move has raised the hackles of many an explorer. 
The difficulty of spotting a moving keejin, even in 
light, adds to their disconcerting presence. Keejin 
hides are coarse and mottled, reflecting the col- 
ors of their native caves. The beasts flee from 
bright light, and so are most often encountered in 
dim light or darkness. Because of subterranean 
echoes, scouts can often hear a keejin long be- 
fore they see it. Tales have been told of unnerving 
journeys into unexplored caverns during spawn- 
ing season, when dozens or even hundreds of 
keejin scuttle about, all out of sight but nonethe- 
less audible. 

Various subterranean plants and small ani- 
mals make up a keejin’s diet. The cave crawler 
pries them off of the walls with short feeding 
tentacles and carries them to the gaping mouth 
located on the creature’s back, between its “shoul- 
ders.” Some large species of keejin have expanded 
their feeding stock: two documented reports 
state that large keejin, over two meters long, 


42 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


STAR Ibliton—Ludos 
nE Cn 


-WA 


dropped from cave roofs and attacked scouting 
parties. While most cave crawler species have 
been proven harmless, these reports of more 
aggressive cousins adds a disturbing menace to 
an otherwise docile being. 

Keejin tails provide both locomotion and sen- 
sory input; these tails end in bulbous organ clus- 
ters that detect changes in temperature, sound, 
and tactile vibrations. Although the creatures 
are visually blind, they retreat when confronted 
with strong light sources. Perhaps these sensory 
organs are so sensitive that the minor heat of a 
light-beam disturbs them. Then again, the shy 
creatures may simply run away when confronted 
with beings larger than themselves. This latter 
theory does not hold up well if one considers the 
twohostileencounters mentioned above, but makes 
sense in light of most keejins’ behavior patterns. 

Cave crawlers, then, are for the most part a 
nuisance, if a disconcerting one. The possibility 
exists, however, for there to be a larger more 
dangerous variety of keejin. In any case, the raspy 


iy # d — 


! Fá 


EE Details of the Keejin’s mouth (above) and sensory 
bulb (below). 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


echoes of keejin claws continues to haunt explor- 
ers in deep unsettled caves across the galaxy. 


m Keejin (Cave Crawler) 
Type: Cave-—dwelling omnivore 
3D 


Special Abilities: 

Camouflage: Between their dull coloration and the dark- 
ness of their habitat, keejin blend into their surroundings. 
Increase visual Perception rolls by two difficulty levels to 
spot keejin against the walls of their caves, 

Clinging: With their barbed claws, keejin can scuttle along 
vertical surfaces and across ceilings. 

Move: 5 

Size: 1-2 meters long 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Phil Brucato 


Lepusa 


The lepusa were first discovered on the planet 
Freliq over two decades ago. From the very start 
they have been the center of planetary contro- 
versy. Persons encountering lepusa for the first 

time are struck by the suggestion of intel- 
ligence in the creature’s eyes. Some 
Imperial zoologists suggest the lepusa 

| may have a crude social order. 
i ] Little is known about the lepusa 
as yet. Their short life span (aver- 
Eog aging roughly 17 years) and their 
penchant for excavation com- 
pounds the difficulties of gather- 
ing reliable data. Living in packs 
of 70 to 100 individuals, with an 
average litter of five to eight 
individuals every two years, un- 


OWE: checked population growth of- 
a a ten results in a maze of under- 
y j} ground tunnels that undermine 
ij h < soil productivity. In recent 


fi years, lepusa migrations have, 
unfortunately, threatened local 
farming efforts. As natural herbi- 
vores that live off roots and grubs, 
lepusa have found newly introduced 
off-world grains to be a particular deli- 
cacy. Few farmers, however, are willing 
to share their plantings with their new 
neighbors. In fact, many lepusa are 
killed as vermin by angry planters. 
| Adding to the controversy, recent 
~~ studies have suggested lepusa are ca- 
pable of manufacturing their own tools. 
These findings are hotly debated by 
farmers, who would lose out if the lepusa 
become classified as a protected species. 
While the debate continues a temporary 
injunction against killing lepusa has been im- 
posed. 


, nt 


lbliton-LudosS maa annem tPA Ro 
eee eee EEE 


ARS 


In The Eye Of The Beholder 


Extract from sworn testimony delivered by 
Yasil Senerio, farm manager, North Ridge Sec- 
tor, Freliq, to an Imperial Investigation Commit- 
tee on Lepusan Intelligence: 


‘Td warned Jullisa to stay away from the 
abandoned rail line running across Veriss 
Creek, But did she listen to her father? Of 
course not. 

“Maybe she saw some particularly colorful 
flower growing along the track's edge. Per- 
haps she just wanted to crawl out and look 
down over the edge of the track. Luckily, Lox 
and J were out in the north field and heard her 
screams for help. When we arrived she was 
dangling from a piece of broken tie, scared to 
death. Then Lox caught my arm, and pointed 
off to the left. That's when I first saw the 
lepusa, 


w Lepusa 
Type: Subterranean burrowing herbivore 
DEXTERITY 4D+2 
Dodge 6D 
PERCEPTION 4D+1 
Hide 5D, search 5D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 
Digging 5D, climbing/jumping 5D 
Special Abilities: 
Claws: Foot and paw claws do STR+2 damage. 


" veninne n 
a Non 
“ti 
we 


~ 


“It was a big white male, nearly a meter tall. 
It must have had a burrow entrance some- 
where on the hillside. It hopped over to the 
bridge, and looked down at Jullisa and the 
water below. Then it started looking around, 
like it was searching for something. Next thing 
I know, it was digging into the ground with its 
hind feet. It pulled a length of vine from the 
ground, 

“The creature bent down and lowered the 
vine to Jullisa. Then it pulled her up. As soon 
as she’s safe, off it thumps. 

“I can’t answer to those others who've said 
the lepusa’s just a dumb beast. They're en- 
titled to their opinion, But for me, seeing is 
believing. I see my little girl here in this court- 
room today thanks to a so-called ‘dumb ani- 
mail.’ That’s all the proof I need.” 


Springing: Above ground, lepusa use their powerful hind 
legs (used primarily for digging) to quickly spring over 
long distances. Such springing leaps also contribute to 
their ability to evade attackers (relfected in their high 
dodge skill code). 

Tool-Making: Lepusa are capable of fashioning rudimen- 
tary tools as aids in excavating and other daily tasks. 
When faced with a problem situation, a lepusa making a 
Difficult Perception roll can discern the potential availabil- 
ity of a too) from nearby materials and construct said tool 
accordingly. 

Move: 6 (burrowing), 9 (walking), 12 (jumping) 

Size: 0.4-0.8 meters tall 

Scale: Creature 


tllustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Rick D, Stuart 


Ludos 


Hailing from the forest world Ganlihk, the 
ludos is an inoffensive creature typically found in 
abundance in the rivers and swamps of that 
planet. Its only known predators are the Ganlihk 
rippers and several types of carnivorous fish 
indigenous to that world. The ludos’ diet con- 
sists primarily of fish and fruit. It prefers to bask 
for Jong hours in the treetops, coming down in 
the coolness of the early morning hours to feed 
on the remnants left by other predators. When 
fish are not available it will opt to forage among 
the various fruit trees native to Ganlihk wetlands. 

Ludos communicate with others of their kind 
through a set of trilling vocalizations which are 
known to have a soothing effect on Humanoid 
nervous systems. For this reason, ludos have 
often been trapped and sold as pets throughout 
the Ganlihk system. The novelty of their natu- 
rally occurring bioluminescence and their docil- 
ity enhance their trade value. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


EE a 


-WA 


The Piper In The Dell 


“Most children at one time or another have 
imaginary friends. So it didn't seem all that 
unusual, therefore, when Jasten announced 
he had a new friend shortly after arriving on 
Ganlihk. He said his friend was a musician, a 
‘piper’ he called him. The piper in the dell. 
Now, my Locris and I both knew there were no 
other musicians currently among the planet’s 
colonists, nor were there any children in the 
vicinity of our encampment who might be 
similarly gifted. So, we just smiled to each 
other and nodded sagely whenever Jasten 
would talk about the different tunes his friend 
would play for him when he went down to the 
dell to play. 

“That, of course, was before we started 
hearing the piping ourselves, It wasn’t pipe 
music actually — certainly nothing a wind or 
reed instrument could ever make. It was too 
high-pitched, too ethereally melodious, but 
strange and mysterious, if you know what | 
mean. It always occurred just before dawn, 
and always lasted for an hour or so. It seemed 
to come from the glade down by the Deseib 
stream. Jasten said his friend often came there 
to play, but, of course, we never found any- 
thing when we went to look for ourselves. 
Nothing, that is, during the day. Twice, just 
before sunrise, while listening to the strange 
music and trying to place its origins, I got up to 
check on Jasten. Twice, just before dawn, | 
thought I glimpsed lights — multi-colored, 
softly glowing lights — darting about down in 
the glen. 

“Now I began to really get concerned. After 
all, we were supposed to be the only persons 
around these parts for several kilometers. If 
there really were others out here this far from 
civilization, why didn’t they show themselves, 
and what did they want from us and from 
Jasten? Then one night, while listening to 
those soothing notes floating in over the grass- 
lands, I went in to check on Jasten only to 
discover he was gone. Glancing out the win- 
dow I saw him, still decked out in his favorite 
crimson sleepware, dashing off towards the 
dell. Looking beyond him for just an instant, | 
could see, first singly, then in pairs, small, 
colored lights coalescing near where | knew 
the stream ran through. Now! really got fright- 
ened! What if Jasten got too close to the water's 
edge at night? I cried out after him, but he 
either didn’t hear me or didn’t feel like reply- 


ing. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


“All my yelling woke Locris. He took one 
look at where Jasten was headed and, grab- 
bing me by the hand, sent out after him. Stop- 
ping barely long enough to get a pair of por- 
table flarelamps, we hurried outside, but that 
was just long enough for us to lose sight of our 
Jasten. Half way to the dell that weird piping 
started up again. Locris’s fears must have got 
the best of him at that point, because he let go 
of my hand and raced ahead. | could see more 
and more lights now, all different colors, glow- 
ing brightly in the distance. Ittook what seemed 
like an eternity to reach that clearing, though 
it was probably no more than five agonizingly 
long minutes. As | rounded the last bend and 
looked out towards the stream, I was not 
prepared for the sight I saw that night. 

“Jasten was sitting calmly at the edge of the 
stream, Locris kneeling next to him with his 
arm around him. All along the top of the water, 
stretching out as far as the eye could see, were 
these glowing, luminescent, floating things. 
Each was maybe half a meter wide with large, 
bulbous ... heads? They were glowing softly, 
showing all the different colors of the spec- 
trum. Some seemed to be glowing in unison 
with others around them, others shifted from 
color to color. All were making this soft, trill- 
ing noise. l guess you might say they were 
singing to each other. No, not quite singing ... 
piping. Less than a meter away from Jasten a 
large ‘piper’ floated on the current, its distinc- 
tively high-pitched sounds forming a sort of 
melodious refrain repeated over and over 
again. Here then was Jasten's imaginary friend. 

“As if somehow sensing my very thoughts, 
Jasten looked around at me and with a big 
smile on his face said, ‘This is my friend.’ With 
that, he calmly turned around again and con- 
tinued to listen to the serenade apparently 
being put on for his benefit. 

“Looking back on things now, I think maybe 
I should have still been scared. | mean, we 
know so little about the ludos, even today. 
Still, none of their kind ever showed any of us 
the slightest ill feeling. | don’t know if they ever 
got anything from us in return, but — and all 
right, this may just be my imagination — but 
sometimes | think they really enjoyed all the 
applause. Jasten’s friend always managed to 
blush a particularly bright shade of red when- 
ever we started clapping.” 

— personal diary of Elisha Merew, 
original settler of Ganlihk Colony 15. 


45 


(bliton—Ludos 


ER Hikers on Ganlihk often use ludos as “backpack companions” to help ward off predators and keep party members in sight of 
each other. Here several hikers and their ludos companions encounter a colony of wild ludos deep in Ganlihk's forest. 


@ Ludos ranging from a blazing red to brilliant white. If all else fails, 
Type: Swampland carnivore the ludos will change to a dull black color and play dead 
DEXTERITY 4D+1 in hopes the confused attacker will move off. 
PERCEPTION 3D+2 Tentacles: Ludos tentacles are well-developed, These are 
STRENGTH 3D+2 used primarily to sift through mud and silt, catching small 
Climbing 4D+2, swimming 6D game with its multiple suckers. On land, these manipula- 
Special Abilities: tive appendages assist in movement through and along 


Bioluminescence: Ludos have chemical compounds in 
their bloodstreams which give off a natural phosphores- 
cent light. This multi-colored illumination aids the ludos 
in navigating through murky waters and acts as a natu- 
rally occurring defensive mechanism (see below). 

Luminescence Control: Ludos can often scare off would-be 
predators by a sudden burst of bright bioluminescence, 


forest growth (+1D to any climbing/jumping rolls), 
Move: 6 (land), 12 (swimming) 

Size; Adults average 30-45 centimeters in diameter, with 
tentacles to 80 centimeters long 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


med TA Magus-Oskan Blood Eater 
Wan ESS aau 


E Magus-Oskan Blood 
Eater 


Magus sa ec 22>. 


The desert world Reopi is home to one of the 
few remaining creatures in the Inner Sphere still 
hunted for its commercial value. Native to the 
vast equatorial sandy deserts of this world, the 
magus is a peaceful, solitary creature that feeds 
off insect and small reptilian life forms found in 
the Red Reopi Deserts. 

Magus hide is well known for its toughness 
and durability and is prized by numerous moder- 
ate and low technology planets lacking the re- 
sources to make inexpensive substitutes. Har- 
vesting of magus hides is presently legal, though M, üj E 
restricted solely to private Reopi businesses. h, AEE, nk A 
The magus population is protected in part by : ey 
strict government quota regulations and the 
creature’s own, natural defenses. 

Magus often feed on the abundance of insect 
life found in the Reopi deserts. To this end its 
rubbery webbed feet are particularly adapt at 
propelling it through shifting sand. The ability to 
burrow rapidly below the desert surface is an 
effective defense against would-be aggressors. 


Lig, oA 


KK, HMipyy ; ~ 


ite 


Beyond the armor-like toughness of its hide, the cretes a foul smelling oil used to discourage predators. 
magus also benefits from the use of a special Attackers must make a Very Difficult stamina roll to close 
gland that secrets a foul smelling oil. While this to within three or four meters. 


Move: 9 (above ground), 14 (moving through sand) 


oil is useful in maintaining the suppleness of the Size: 58 centimeters long when fully extended 


magus' outer hide layers, its extremely noxious 


odor is often sufficient to deter larger carnivores Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Rick D. Stuart 
like the Reopi sand crusher. Magus are most 
vulnerable around desert oasis, where the pres- Miners Horror 


ence of small reptiles often serves as a conve- 


: res The origins of the miner's horrors are un- 
nient lure hunters can capitalize on. 


known; perhaps they evolved in a distant star 


m Magus cluster in an arm of the galaxy; perhaps they 
Type: Desert browser come from beyond the galaxy itself. 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 Although miner’s horrors are exceedingly rare, 
iT 2D+1 the devastation they can inflict on small space- 
STRENGTH 1D+1 crafts and populated asteroids is enough to make 
Stamina 5D a pirate cringe. 
Special Abilities: Pirates first discovered the horror some five 


Armor: Magus hide is both thick and extremely tough, Add millennia ago; no one believed their transmis- 


+1D+1 against all physical and energy attacks. A aS $ 
Claws: Poot and paw claws do STR+2 damage. sions until a junker salvaged the remains of a ship 


Odors: Magus possess a special defensive gland that se- | devastated by the horror. Two armed freighters 


Creatures of the Galaxy 47 


were sent to kill the beast, One came back intact; 
the other suffered severe damage. Since that first 
contact, other reports of miner’s horrors have 
surfaced. To date, none have appeared further in 
than the relatively remote Tion, but it may only 
be a matter of time before they spread to more 
central regions of the galaxy, Some fear that the 
creatures are part of a slow but determined 
invasion force, sent to soften up the Empire for 
some massive attack. Others believe that miner's 
horrors that have already been encountered are 
tiny compared to the ones that may be on the 
way. 

Miner's horrors feed on minerals ground from 
asteroids. The creature's saw-like teeth chew 
space rock into dust while an efficient filtration 
system absorbs the dust, refines it into pure 
minerals, and circulates them throughout the 
monster’s body. Though minerals eaten are di- 
gested slowly over time, miner’s horrors remain 
hungry throughout their lives. Whole asteroid 
belts have been consumed by one creature, al- 
though this destruction can take decades. 

Through some unknown organ or process, a 
miner’s horror can “sniff out” quantities of miner- 
als. Since starships are composed of refined ore, 
a miner's horror would regard a ship as a veri- 
table feast. Fortunately, horrors are slow. Unfor- 
tunately, they are difficult to destroy. Battling 
oneis like fighting a small starship — one without 
guns but carrying an incredible boarding weapon. 
Some mining companies have hunted horrors; 
the few that have been killed yielded a bonanza of 
refined ore. The catch is finding, stalking, and 
killing such a creature — a heroic task indeed. 

With one exception, all miner’s horrors thus 


Magus—Oskan Blood Eater nessa’ FAA Wie 


eee SS SoS SOWARS 


encountered have been solitary. This exception, 
the site of a massive starship battle, became the 
feeding ground for three of the massive beasts 
(this sector is now off-limits to any astrogater 
with half a brain). Xenobiologists theorize that 
the horrors lay eggs or embryos within aster- 
oids. No such cache has ever been found, but the 
bodies that scientists have obtained suggest that 
the horrors lay eggs and reproduce asexually. 
Their lifespans are unknown, but may last for 
centuries. 


m Miner's Horror 
Type: Vacuum predator 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 5D 
Special Abilities: 
Saw; The saw-bladed teeth of the miner's horror vibrate 
at high speed, chewing anything in its path to bits, STR+2D 
damage. 
Armor: Add +2D to resist damage fram physical or energy 
attacks, 
Move: 3 (Space) 
Size: 20) meters long or larger 
Scale: Starfighter 
Note: Treat its brawling skill as its attack skill when en- 
countering a starship; treat Strength (with armor) as its 
hull code and treat Dexterity as its maneuverability code. 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Phil Brucato 


Nyantolo 


Beneath the marsh waters of Wyndigal 2, 
nyantolo slowly drift, scooping up swamp refuse 
and small fishes into their gaping maws. 

Nyantolo, named for an unfortunate comrade 
of the scout who discovered them, are essen- 
tially mindless creatures of instinct who drift 
through the brackish currents. From time to 
time, some stimulus wills them to swim with their 
heavy flippers, but for the most part nyantolo 
seem content to ease themselves through the 
swamps with slow strokes of their tails, 

When an organic being steps too near a 
nyantolo’s feeding ground, however, that being 
is added to the menu, The nyantolo explodes into 
action then, snapping at prey with its bony break 
and shovel jaw. Nyantolo himself, a Rodian scout 
who got too close to the then-unknown creature, 
had his legs swept out from under him by a 
flipper before his head was crushed by the thing’s 
strong beak. 

Fortunately, the nyantolo species does not 
appear to be social. One stakes out a feeding 
ground which others appear to ignore as if it 
never existed. They appear to have short natural 
life spans — two to five standard years — and 
reproduce only once or twice within that time. 
Observed specimens mate communally; nyantolo 
have three different genders and all three are 
needed for reproduction. When the mating sea- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


son ends, the creatures go their separate ways, 
dispensing a cache of eggs in the mud some three 
standard weeks later. 

Nyantolo excrete a tacky substance across 
their backs; this substance attracts debris and 
insects of all kinds, who then become stuck, die, 
and harden into a hollow carapace. This cara- 
pace accumulates over the creature’s lifetime, 
drifting and hardening into odd shapes and cham- 
bers. Nyantolo vibrate air into these chambers 
from breathing vents in their backs; this sounds 
becomes their mating call when the gathering 
season approaches. The older the being, the 
bigger and more intricate the shell; the bigger the 
shell, the louder the call and the greater the 
amount of mates summoned by that call. Scouts 
report that these “songs” become quite eerie; the 
wailing of dozens of nyantolo at mating time is 
said to drive some men mad. 

Xenobiologists have discovered an attraction 
gland inside the mouths of some captured speci- 
mens (in two of the five known sub-species). This 
gland secretes an oily fluid that draws small fish 
from up to 15 meters away. The attracted fish 
swim into the mouths of the nyantolo. Croator 
(also native to Wyndigal 2) seem to be especially 
susceptible to these secretions; dissected 
nyantolo often have fresh croator remains in 
their double-chambered bellies. Scouts and cast- 
aways are well advised to avoid the nyantolos of 
Wyndigal 2's temperate swamps. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


wm Nyantolo 
Type: Carapaced aquatic mammal 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Special Abilities: 
Concealment: Because of the nyantolo's outer covering 
and habitat, characters encountering the creature must 
make a Difficult Perception roll to spot it when it's inactive. 
Bite: Does STR+3D. 
Song: The nyantolo makes a moaning whistle through its 
outer crust. This song attracts other nyantolo for mating, 
but disconcerts most other beings. 
Move: 5 (swimming) 
Size: 2.5-3 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


? 


illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Phil Brucato 


Onahks 


Onahks are reddish-gray aquatic creatures 
native to the temperate marshes and wetlands of 
the backwater planet Osirrag (see page 20 of 
Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three). They live in 
“pods” of anywhere from two to eight adults 
(cubs in a pod number from two to perhaps a 
dozen). Their diet consists of small avians, rep- 
tiles and game creatures during the summer and 
fish in the winter. 

They are nomadic herd animals. Hunting, mi- 
gration and all other functions are done together, 
and onahks, when attacked by larger predators, 
have been known to defend a sick or injured 
member of their pod even ifit results in the death 
of several other members of the group. 


Maqus—Oskan Blood Eater 


Physically, onahks are six-legged, amphibious 
water breathers with a number of interesting 
biological adaptations, including their “extend- 
able” neck. During the summer, these creatures 
spend most of their time patrolling the shallow 
marshes and nearby wetlands; at that time, the 
neck expands to a length of up to two meters 
(through cartilage and filling blood vessels). As 
the colder seasons come on and the creatures 
prepare for the long winter underwater, the neck 
contracts to barely a third of a meter long. 

They have very sophisticated eyes on the end 
of the neck, while the mouth is located on the 
creature's underside. Taste and smell bulbs are 
on the end of the forward “long stalks” and the 
rear “short stalks.” Onahks also have two very 
large air sacs on their backs, which they inflate or 
deflate quickly to assist in swimming. 

Onahks are clearly evolved for both land and 
water. They breathe water, but can draw neces- 
sary oxygen from air for up to five minutes. They 
have retractable membranes between their 
clawed toes for swimming, but their muscle and 


Magus-Oskan Blood Eater an A A Pts 


ARS 


skeletal structure indicate a creature clearly at 
home on land. They are very agile creatures, able 
to climb, jump and sprint with surprising deft- 
ness; they are also adept at wriggling around 
underwater obstacles such as roots and digging 
into the warrens built by quolers, their primary 
aquatic prey. 

They had been believed to be quite fearful of 
any animal larger than their normal prey, includ- 
ing Humans. However, as the colonists of Osirrag 
have spread to wilderness areas, a number of 
encounters have occurred with the onahks; the 
animals seem to be curious about the newcom- 
ers. Apparently, some pods’ cubs have begun 
following settlers in the wilderness (at least until 
the adult onahks round them up and scurry off). 

When chased or shot at, onahks have proven 
surprisingly nimble and they have great affinity 
for using the trees and other natural terrain to 
avoid pursuers and escape. Some settlers have 
taken to domesticating onahks for meat, but 
many have also been taken in as pets, and in that 
regard they have proven loyal, trustworthy and 
quite intelligent. 


m Onahk 
Type: Curious aquatic hunter 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Brawling parry 4D, dodge 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 3D, sneak 4D 
STRENGTH 1D+1 
Brawling 3D+2, climbing/jumping 3D+1, swimming 4D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Constricting Attack: Onahks can attack by constricting 
with their necks, using the brawling skill and causing 
STR+1D+2 damage. 
Claws: Foot claws cause STR+1D damage and add +1D to 
climbing. 
Move: 10 (running), 14 (swimming) 
Size: 1 meter long, 2.3 meters tall (neck fully extended) 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Bill Smith 


Oskan Blood Eater 


Blood eaters are primarily used as guardian 
creatures on numerous prison planets. They prey 
on any creature that has oxygenated blood, but, 
because of their size, they concentrate on larger, 
mammalian creatures. 

The blood eater’s method of hunting is par- 
ticularly gruesome. They carve their prey into 
tiny pieces using their slashing claws, leaving 
nothing more than a pile of flesh and a pool of 
blood. The blood eaters then lower their heads 
into the pool of blood and ingest it through the 
many holes in their perforated mouths. 

There are very few genetic differences be- 
tween individual blood eaters. This is partly due 
to the parthenogenic method of reproduction 
used by the creature, but it is also, in a large part, 
caused by aremarkably effective method of error 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


f 
|. 


— e i (P en UG 


bk FPP FP te ew US oe 


Wet Wee 


E eee Sa Magus—Oskan Blood Eater 
-WARS —_— 


correction that is used during the meiotic cellu- 
lar reproduction of the blood eater. This effect 
creates an extremely low rate of mutation 
among the blood eaters, making their ability 
to exist in such a wide range of environ- 
ments remarkable. 

Blood eaters are found in many sys- 
tems, but do not play a part in the primitive 
mythology of the natives of these planets (as 
carnivores of this magnitude usually do). 
Because of this, and because of the unlikely 
predatory characteristics developed by the 
blood eaters, many zoologists believe that they 
are artificially developed creatures. 

The official Imperial explanation (advanced in 
the form of rumors carefully placed by the Desta- 
bilization branch of Imperial Intelligence’s Bu- 
reau of Operations) for the existence of the blood 
eaters is that these creatures were produced by 
the Old Republic and are the result of hideous 
genetic manipulation experiments. The true 
story, however, is that they are the product of 
unauthorized Imperial experiments ... their 
ultimate purpose being unknown. 


m Oskan Blood Eater 
Type: Aggressive carnivore 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search: tracking 5D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Special Abilities: 

Claws: Do STR+3D damage. 
Frenzy: The sight of a humanoid or other large crea- 
ture causes blood eaters to go into a frenzy, This frenzy 
adds +2D to damage. 

Tracking: Blood eaters do not have highly sensitive sen- 
sory organs, but they make up for it in determination. If a 
blood eater attacks a creature that manages to escape, 
then the blood eater will search for that creature for 
upwards of two standard weeks. 

Move: 6 

Size: 2.5 meters tall 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept; Tim Bobko/Design: Chuck Truett 


Creatures of the Galaxy 51 


Preying Makthier-—Ranph 


AR 
ARS 


EE Preying Makthier- 


Ranphyx 


Preying Makthier 

The elaborate crystal caves of Makthierse are 
home to an unlikely form of predator, the preying 
makthier. Ranging roughly one to two meters in 
length, at first glance these carnivores give the 
appearance of an amusing form of flying larvae. 
However, there is nothing laughable about a 
makthier’s voracious hunger. The average 
makthier is capable of consuming twice its body 
mass in the space of a single feeding. While 
makthier typically feed off various small rodents 
found in their cave dwellings, it is not unheard of 
for groups of makthiers to hunt away from their 
lairs, principally on small herd animals in the 
vicinity. While primarily a nocturnal hunter using 
highly developed sonic abilities to pinpoint prey 
in total darkness, the makthier is not above at- 
tacking Humanoids who may unknowingly in- 
vade its subterranean lairs. 


Insuchinstances, makthiers have been known 
to mass for an attack in groups of 10 or more ata 
time. Makthiers are also very territorial. For this 
reason, few colonists settle in areas adjacent to 
Makthiersian caves. Unfortunately, the full ex- 
tent of the caves are, as yet, unknown. Much of 
the northern continental plateau in which the 
crystal caves are situated may well be honey- 
combed with passages to and from the interior. 
In this manner, the preying makthiers may have 
far more extensive hunting grounds than previ- 
ously anticipated, thus posing a far more danger- 
ous threat to newly arriving colonists than has 
been suspected. 


m Preying Makthier 
Type: Cave-dwelling carnivore 
DEXTERITY 3D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D+1 
Search 4D, sneak 4D+2 
STRENGTH 3D+1 
Lifting 5D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Sonic Motion Detection: Makthiers are blind in normal 
light. In the dimness of their caves, and while 
hunting at night, makthiers locate and track 
prey through the use of ultrasonic waves re- 
flected back to paint a three-dimensional pic- 
ture of their surroundings. Makthiers thus have excellent 
hunting skills despite their visual limitations. Makthiers 
add +1D+2 to all search rolls. 
Constriction: Makthier tails are extremely flexible and 
adaptive. Numerous small suckers aid the creature in 
grappling and holding larger creatures, Makthiers add 
+1D to any lifting rolls. Wrapping multiple coils of tail 
around a victim while attempting to immobilize it also 
causes 1D damage per round due to constriction, Once 
caught by a makthier, the victim also receives a -2D 
Dexterity penalty due to constriction. Victims may at- 
tempt to free themselves from the makthier's coils by 
making a Very Difficult Strength roll. 
Paralyzing Stinger: Makthier tails contain a poison stinger 
that causes 2D damage (from the barbed stinger itself); 
the poison causes 4D stun damage for five successive 
rounds, 
Move: 10 (flying) 
Size: 1.2-1.7 meters long, wingspan up to 2 meters 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


DO ee Preying Makthier-—Ranphyx 
“WARS ar 


A Most Unusual Damage Claim 


Sirloss Brill: For the record, we moved into 
the region down by Quantrax Creek about six 
months ago. We got our first herd of laca fur- 
bearers together about a week after that. At 
first, everything seemed to be going right. The 
herd adapted to the new grazing lands with- 
out any bother. The climate was good. We 
were convinced there were no predators to 
worry about. Everything was going along just 
fine. 

Then, about three months ago we started 
losing stock. We'd find two or three head 
missing each morning. We set up low fre- 
quency sonic inhibitors, but they didn’t seem 
tomake any difference. We even posted guards, 
but nobody ever heard or saw anything. Yet, 
come first light, we'd still come up two or 
three head short. Next thing we know, the 
more superstitious of the locals clear off and 
me and Tovis are left with less than a dozen 
men to pull up the slack. And we keep on 
losing cattle. 

So finally, Tovi and 1, along with a handful of 
workhands who didn’t mind earning some 
extra pay, decided to camp out one night to 
see if we could figure out what the deuce was 
happening to our profits. We set up shop right 
in the middle of the herd and posted guards 
and started to wait. 

As it turned out, | had the third watch, 
about three hours before sunrise. Everything 
was picture perfect, quiet and peaceful as you 
please. I’m sitting by the fire, nursing a cup of 
hot asdac, while I'm watching the herd. Well, 
there lam, just looking around some, and then 
this one laca starts rising straight up into the 
air! I had to rub my eyes to make sure | was 
seeing straight. Next thing] know, another one 
— zip! — decided to take a moonlight trip over 
the countryside. 

l figure I may be going crazy. As a third laca 
starts defying gravity, | start yelling my head 
off. Tovi grabs a magnatorch and points it 
skyward. There’s my missing laca, hanging in 


Qormots 


Qormots have alternately been described as 
the most docile, and the fiercest, of any known 
forest animals. The difference in description lies 
largely with the time of year during which the 
qormot is observed. 

For much of Yeshocq’s 13-month year, the 
qormot is a relatively peaceful omnivore, con- 
tent to wander in small prides through the for- 
ests and jungle growths that dot the southern 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


mid-air, with these three sickly green things 
hanging ontoit. They were like nothing I'd ever 
seen before and I've been herding on more 
planets than I can remember. They looked for 
all the world like insect larvae, with these huge 
membranes on either side, flapping around 
like wings. They had long tails that they used 
to wrap themselves around the laca — must 
be how they managed to lift them off the 
ground — these baddies were strong! Anyway, 
they had these long stingers in their tails, and 
I see one of them sticking his into the laca 
again and again. 

Poor, dumb brute never had a chance. No, 
not the laca, I mean Tovi! Seems there was a 
whole bunch of them that night. Soon as Tovi 
shines his light on them, one of them swooped 
down and stung Tovi. He came to eventually, 
but with a headache you'd not believe. 

Anyway, that tore it! Nobody sticks my 
brother and gets away with it! 1 pulled my 
blaster and started shooting. Course, I’m not 
the best shot in the galaxy and it was night. 
Couple of the boys started up as well, but we 
didn’t hit anything. I guess, if anything, we just 
scared them away. 

Well, I couldn't afford to keep taking the 
losses | had, so me and Tovi decided to move 
the herd up north. That was about three 
months ago and we haven’t had any trouble 
since. Now then, those are the facts, just like 
they happened. | realize this is probably a bit 
out of the ordinary, a most unusual damage 
claim I'll grant you, but | am covered against 
loss by indigenous predators. So, what do ya 
say? When do | get my credits? 

Sirloss Brill’s Claim Adjudicator: Let me 
get this straight: a flock of giant, flying insect 
larvae conspired to carry off your best lacas, 
weighing an average of 300 kilograms each? 

Sirloss Brill: You got it right! 

Sirloss Brill’s Claim Adjudicator: Of course 
... next! 


hemisphere. The only exception to this rule oc- 
curs when rival gormots or would-be predators 
cross territorial boundaries, triggering an imme- 
diate and aggressive response. During the mat- 
ing season (in the weeks preceding winter), how- 
ever, qormots in general, and females in particu- 
lar, take on a more violent nature, as competition 
for choice breeding grounds intensifies. During 
this time any creature encroaching on qormot 
space is likely to be attacked. 


Preying Makthier—RAN PN YX «mmm 0 A Wc 
ARS 


EE Qormot mating battles are fierce struggles. 


RA Creatures of the Galaxy 


— TAR Preying Makthier-Ranphyx 


DOÁS 


m Oormot 
Type: Forest omnivore 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Running 5D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 5D, sneak 4D 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
Brawling 6D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Claws; Foot and paw claws do STR+1 damage. 
Territorial: Qormot routinely react violently to any per- 
ceived invasion of their territory, During mating season 
this aggressive tendency is heightened, especially among 
rival females. 
Quills: Spine and flank quills do 3D damage at close range 
(0-4 meters) and 2D damage at medium and long (5-8/12 
meters). 
Restricted Vision: Because of its single eye, the qormot has 
difficulty in distinguishing distances and multiple objects 
in a three-dimensional perspective. Any creature more 
than 5 meters from a qormot gets a bonus of +1D to dodge 
to avoid quill attacks. 
Teeth: Serrated teeth do STR+2 damage. 
Move: 8 (walking), 14 (charging) 
Size: 1.2 meters long, 1 meter tall at the shoulder 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Rick D, Stuart 


Quamin 


The vicious quamin, a denizen of the Kidron 
jungles, is everything the slork is not; quiet, neat, 
light and aggressive (see separate entry on 
slorks). The razored fins along their tails lash out 
at prey as the quamin (plural guamilla in Orfite 
vernacular) sails past on membranous wings. 

Quamilla often attack in force, swooping from 
the trees in waves. When their target collapses 
from blood loss, the beasts alight on their prey 
and absorb life fluids through the spongy feeding 
vents on their “faces.” The resulting husks are 
often then eaten by slorks. 

Quamilla have leathery skin, hollow bones 
and surprisingly strong muscles. Their thin 
razored tails are sometimes used as weapons by 
desperate Orfites or status-seeking off-worlders. 
Light and sharp, the tail fins are often lashed to 
poles, braided into whips, or carved into throw- 
ing wedges. Such a weapon, it is said, will never 
go dull, though dead tail fins break quite easily. 
On living specimens, broken fins regenerate over 
a standard week or less. Deprived of their only 
weapon, broken-tailed quamilla may starve to 
death before their fins grow back. 

Tiny hearts pulse deep inside the quamin’s 
ribcage, three of them in all. During rest, they 
work at a fraction of their normal capacity, going 
to their full strength only during flight and com- 
bat. Because of this redundant system, quamilla 
can suffer serious internal damage and still stand 
a reasonable chance of healing. Because of 
Kidron's thin atmosphere, quamin lungs are fairly 
large in proportion to their size. 


Like slork, quamilla seem to use smell to find 
their way about, rather than by using visual 
organs. Quamilla are not intelligent. 

Though quamilla run in packs, or “flights,” 
they seem to dislike each other’s company. 
Xenobiologists have observed quamin flights 
fighting for dominance within their groups. They 
do not seem territorial, but fight instead over 
portions of the kill and dominance among other 
members of the flight. Quamin flights aver- 
age between five to 10 in number, 
but some unfortunate in- 
dividuals have en- = 
countered nd 
flights oe 


EE Detail of the wing manipulator and head of the 
quamin. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


55 


large enough to decimate a five-man scouting 
party. Visitors to the Kidron jungles are advised 
to keep a wary eye on surrounding trees and 
hillsides. 


m= Quamin 
Type: Vicious flying menace 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Special Abilities: 
Flight: Quamin wing quietly through the air, getting +1Dto 
sneak when approaching their targets. 
Razor Tail Whip: Quamin tails do STR+1D+2 damage and 
deep cuts heal slowly, continuing to ache and bleed for 
hours (or even days). 
Sensing: Quamin use smell to sense their way through 
thick smoke, darkness or bad weather with no penalty. 
Move: 16 
Size: 1.7-meter wingspan, 2 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Phil Brucato 


Quizzer 


The quizzer, an arboreal denizen of Gamorr, 
has a mischievous streak a kilometer wide. Un- 
like the violent Gamorreans, quizzers seem harm- 


Preying Makthier-Ranphyx smmm 0 A Weems 


ARS— 


less, at least by intent. Their fondness for pretty 
shiny things, however, can be a dangerous habit. 

Bipedal climbers with prehensile tails and 
opposable thumbs, quizzers scramble about 
Gamorr's forests with abandon. Their claws en- 
able them to stand upright on branches and 
climb rapidly. Xenobiologists disagree about the 
purpose of the four bony plates that project from 
the quizzers’ backs; some believe that these fins 
allow the imps to regulate their body tempera- 
ture in the temperamental Gamorrean weather. 
Others speculate that the plates offer some sort 
of protection against rear attacks, though their 
ungainly nature makes this unlikely. Despite their 
awkward appearance, quizzers have no difficulty 
navigating dense foliage or leaping great dis- 
tances. 

Quizzers are, however, at a disadvantage on 
level ground. Their clawed feet are designed for 
tree travel, not running. Consequently, quizzers 
avoid descending from the trees whenever any 
other beingis within close range. They are deeply 
curious, however, and will follow strangers for 
kilometers if possible ... especially if these new- 
comers carry anything shiny with them. 

Glittering objects fascinate quizzers; the little 
beasts will race from the trees, grab whatever 
meets their fancy, and disappear into the upper 
branches to examine their prize. This occasion- 
ally leads to disaster; quizzers have been know to 
steal grenades, blasters, medpacs and even, on 
one memorable occasion, a thermal detonator. 
The native Gamorreans hate quizzers, but each 
organized campaign to eradicate the pests has 
failed. Visitors to Gamorr are advised to keep 
shiny objects out of sight, especially if traveling 
in the planet’s dense forests. 

The mammalian quizzers reproduce in live- 
born litters of between three and five. Female 
quizzers have a thick pouch across their stom- 
achs with which to carry their newborns. Quizzers 
grow to maturity within seven standard months; 
during this time, they are “trained” in the basics 
of tree-travel by their elders. Mating season be- 
gins soon after aturlino, or “the season of heavy 
rains;” many tribes of quizzers meet at instinc- 
tual breeding grounds. Gamorrean hunters have 
tried, unsuccessfully, to discourage quizzer 
breeding by chopping down the trees or setting 
up hunting sites in quizzer territories, but the 
trap rarely works more than once. The speed 
with which quizzers adapt to environmental 
changes makes a good argument for abstract 
intelligence. 

Quizzers communicate through a simple se- 
ries of barks, cheeps and howls; they have been 
known to squeak when in pain. Social groups 
range from small family tribes to larger gather- 
ings numbering in the dozens. Any non-quizzer 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


md TAA 
-WA 


encountering such a gathering (called a quizzling 
by the Gamorreans) will be harassed mercilessly; 
objects will be stolen, food will be eaten, and 
debris will be thrown from the treetops. Such 
quizzlings are usually short-lived, as the local 
Gamorreans often declare open hunting season if 
a quizzling is discovered. 

The tree-tricksters subsist largely on fruit and 
leaves. They tend to sleep hanging from their 
tails, which once gave rise to Gamorrean bed- 
time stories of fruit which came to life and ate the 
fruitpickers. Despite their nuisance value, 
quizzers are rarely violent except during mating 
contests. Some collectors have purchased them 
as pets, but they can be too annoying for domes- 
tication and often die in captivity. Quizzers seem 
happiest in the wild, and are perhaps best left 
there. 


m Quizzer 
Type: Scampering beast 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Special Abilities: 
Climbing: Because of their natural dexterity and familiar- 
ity with their environment, quizzers add +2D to their rolls 
when sneaking or climbing. 
Move: 7 (running), 12 (climbing or swinging in trees) 
Size: 0.5 meters tall 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Phil Brucato 


The Raen Sovra 


The Raen sovra (known by the nickname “elec- 
trocution worm”) is a species of primitive seg- 
mented worms who have developed metal ex- 
oskeletons and feed primarily on electricity and 
metal. They are — along with the mynocks and 
the trahio — members of a very small group of 
creatures known as technivores. 

They are considered to be a threat in many 
parts of the galaxy because their diet — com- 
bined with their ability to sense electricity and 
metal — has caused them to begin preying on 
large technological devices (including starships 
and other vehicles) which they easily destroy, 
consuming stored energy, weakening metal com- 
ponents, severing power and data cables, and 
discharging computer processors, 

The sovra are weak and unintelligent, but they 
respond to danger quickly, and have at their 
disposal a powerful weapon — electricity. When 
a sovra is disturbed, it lashes out and entangles 
the creature that has disturbed it, producing a 
strong electrical shock that quite often electro- 
cutes its target. 

The sovra were discovered by Dr. Safford 
Raen during his initial, ill-fated expedition to the 
Mis-Tenek system. Dr. Raen had originally in- 
tended to study the development of the vinna 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


trees, hoping to discover the process through 
which they acquired the thick layer of metal that 
completely covered their trunks. It was not until 
anumber of researchers were electrocuted while 
studying the root system of the trees that Dr. 
Raen turned his attentions to the sovra. 

The metallic bark of the vinna trees is an 
extremely effective conductor of the electrical 
energy that fills the skies of Tenek. When the 
trees are struck by lightning, the electricity is 
discharged through the roots of the tree, filling 
the damp ground with an electrical charge that is 
consumed by the sovra., Millions of sovra burrow 
through the ground among the roots of the vinna 
trees, constantly tilling the soil and facilitating 
the transfer of water and minerals to the roots of 
the plants of the Tenek forests. 

Many other species serve this same function 
on other planets, but the system developed on 
Tenek is more efficient than most others. The 
fact that the sovra gain most of their nourish- 


Preying Makthier—Ranphyx 


Preying Makthier—Ranph 


ment from the transferred electricity (and not 
from the soil in which they burrow), means that 
more organic nutrients are available for the plants 
and trees. 

The spread of the sovra through the galaxy 
has beén likened to that of a disease. They are 
attracted to any starships that land on the planet 
and often enter these ships, looking for energy on 
which to feed. In many cases, sovra remain unde- 
tected on these ships when they leave the planet. 
Although some ships are destroyed in hyper- 
space when the sovra consume more energy 
than the ship can spare, many of the ships are 
able to reach their destinations. The sovra then, 
feeding on the massive amounts of electricity 
generated in a starport, breed, multiply and in- 
fect other ships. As a result of this process, the 
sovra are now found in many places in the galaxy, 
living in starships, space stations and in the 
electrical conduits of many modern buildings. 

Because of the danger that the sovra pose to 
technology, the entire Mis-Tenek system is cur- 
rently under quarantine, However, the spread of 
sovra has not ended. Smugglers still land on 
Tenek, and the sovra are still attracted to the 
electrical energy generated by their starships. 
When these smugglers leave, it is not uncommon 
for sovra to leave with them. 

Most descriptions of the sovra — extremely 
primitive segmented worms that are covered by 
metal exoskeletons — make them appear to be 
much less than they actually are. On closer in- 
spection, it is found that the exoskeleton is not 
rigid (as is the case in the exoskeletons of insects 
and arachnids), but is, instead, extremely flex- 
ible, and the metal itself is capable of moving in 
response to instructions from the nervous sys- 
tem of the sovra. This aspect of the physiology of 
the sovra has been the source of much discus- 
sion among zoological researchers, many of 
whom violently oppose the current quarantine, 

It is not generally known, but the Empire has 
collected a number of sovra for research, hoping 
to discover knowledge that would allow them to 
make living armor. Current research has led to 
the creation of a line of highly effective and easily 
concealable vibroblades that are often used by 
Imperial assassins. 

In addition, interest in the private sector is 
high, and many researchers are willing to pay any 
number of credits for a living sovra. 


mi The Raen Sovra 
Type: Electricity parasite 
DEXTERITY 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Electricity Sense: The Raen sovra has a highly developed 
ability to sense the flow of electrical currents. Because of 
this, they receive a +3D bonus to Perception for all tasks 


that involve the perception of electricity. 

Electrocution: Because of its ability to store electrical 
energy, the Raen sovra also has the ability to deliver an 
electrical shock (causing 5D+2 damage) to any creature 
that it is in physical contact with, 

Space Survival: The Raen sovra is not harmed by cold or 
lack of air and can survive in deep space indefinitely. 
Move: 5 

Size: Up to 8 meters long, and up to 5 centimeters in 
diameter 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Chuck 
Truett 


m Vibrodagger 
Model: Imperial Munitions Vibrodagger 
Type: Prototype vibro weapon 
Skill: Melee combat: vibrodagger 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Difficulty: Moderate 
Damage: STR + 4D (Maximum 7D) 
Capsule: With its short (15 cm) blade, the 
vibrodagger is easily concealed and incredibly dan- 
gerous, However, possession of this specific type of 
vibrodagger by any being not so authorized by 
Imperial Intelligence's Bureau of Operations is con- 
sidered to be a capital offense. 


Ranphyx 

Inthe wilderness desert plains and small moun- 
tains of Elom, the ranphyx stand at the top of the 
food chain. Although the Elomin civilization 
claims good portions of land for mining and 
limited agriculture, vast tracts of unsettled wil- 
derness remain: it is here that the ranphyx (plu- 
ral and singular) thrive. 

Elomin avoid uninhabited places for a reason; 
ranphyx are splendid ambushers and trackers, 
and anyone crossing their path is fair game. 
Nomadic packs wander the open lands, digging 
burrows or finding caves when shelter is needed. 

Ranphyx prefer living prey, but have no com- 
punctions about grazing or scavenging if the 
need arises. Though not sentient in the accepted 
sense, these hunters have an established social 
order and a fairly complex language of barks, 
growls, purrs and cries. They gather in packs of 
between 10to 15 adults, although mountain packs 
are slightly smaller. Cubs are born in litters of 
two after gestating for roughly six standard 
months. 

Young ranphyx grow slowly for wild animals, 
reaching adulthood in about four standard years. 
During this time, the growing cub learns hunting, 
tracking, communication and survival skills from 
the other members of the pack. The entire pack, 
from the mothers to the leader, or kzenka, of the 
pack, teach the cubs these necessary things. 

The position of kzenka changes every five 
years or so. Each ranphyx pack, regardless of 
location, instinctively knows when this time has 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


oS AR reyn Makthier-Ranphyx 


Creatures of the Galaxy 59 


Pr 


come. The largest within the pack fight for the 
privilege to lead, and the strongest, regardless of 
gender, becomes kzenka. These fights are rarely 
to the death, though many ranphyx die of their 
injuries. This leadership ritual, and the hard- 
ships of the hunt, keep the pack population low. 

Though they are fearsome hunters, ranphyx 
sledom venture close to Elomin settlements, and 
then only at night. In some cases, small Elomin 
communities have made a kind of peace with 
local ranphyx packs; local mythology often tells 
of strong bonds between ranphyx and Elomin. 
Despite these tales, ranphyx seldom take well to 
domestication. Some Elomin females have 
ranphyx companions they can call on in need; 
these individuals are attributed with supernatu- 
ral powers and are looked on by other Elomin 
with a combination of fear and respect. These 
ranphyx seem to share territory with their “mis- 
tresses” as partners rather than as pets. 

A ranphyx’s forked tail is an enigma; many 


ing Makthier-Ranphyx eee), A am 


ARST 


xenobiologists theorize that the tail helps shed 
excess heat. The Elomin claim that the color of 
the tail changes with the animal's emotional state 
— from dark green anger to a dull red for content- 
ment. Ranphyx fur is often tawny, but varies from 
place to place. Many packs share spotted or 
mottled coats, while other packs are off-white or 
dark gray. 


m Ranphyx 
Type: Intelligent herd predator 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Special Abilities: 
Senses: Ranphyx possess sharp senses of smell and hear- 
ing, and add +2D to their Perception rolls when applicable. 
Horns: Gore for STR+1D. 
Stealth: Ranphyx add +2D when tracking, hiding and sneak- 
ing. 
Move: 10 (running), 12 (leaping) 
Size: 1.5 to 2 meters long, 0.8 meters tall at the shoulder 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Phil Brucato 


a eaaa e o e e a o a e o a 


60 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—STA 


EE Sanl jek-Svaper 


Sanl'jeks 


The jungles of the tropical swamp world 
Dancreti are home to an unusual and very tiny 
tree dweller known as the sanl’jek. Named after 
the zoologist who uncovered their existence, 
sanl’jeks are communal creatures that live in 
prides ranging from 50 to 100 members. Largely 
nomadic gatherers, sanl'jek prides can cover 
vast expanses of forest each year in search of 
hanging fruits and berries. Extended communi- 
ties can range over thousands of kilometers each 
year in their annual migrations. 

Sanl'jeks bear their young almost fully devel- 
oped (although they are still tiny). Newborn young 
are routinely kept in the mother's protective 
pouch for upwards ofalocal year (about nine and 
a half standard months). A litter can have up- 
wards of 10 young. 

During this time, the young sanl’jeks learn to 
use their amazing auditory senses. A set of audi- 
tory sensors located along the creature's upper 
jaw allows a sanl’jek to immediately identify its 
own mother’s heartbeat. By the end of the year, 
offspring are normally about a tenth of a meter 
long (half their eventual adult size). 

A sanl'jek can distinguish the heartbeats of 
genetically similar community members over 
dozens of kilometers. In the presence of would- 
be aggressors, sanl’jek can likewise determine an 
intruder’s likely intent by detecting small changes 
in the creature's heartbeat as it prepares to fight 
or flee. This communal sensitivity has fostered 
other, unusual social developments. 

While generally inoffensive and passive crea- 
tures, if any member of the community is at- 
tacked, changes in the victim’s heartbeat trig- 
gers an immediate aggressive response in other 
members of the group. Given the vast distances 
over which the average sanl’jek can discern the 
heartbeats of fellow group members, it is not 
uncommon for a maddened sanl’jek to cover 
dozens of kilometers in response to an attack on 
one of its kind. During such attacks, the aggres- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


sor is often overwhelmed by sheer numbers 
despite the diminutive size of the sanl’jeks. 

The communal! sanl’jeks, as a rule, will con- 
tinue to press the attack, contemptuous of the 
losses taken, until the attacker is either over- 
come or driven off. Perhaps one clue as to the 
nature of this unusual defense mechanism can be 
found in the short life span of the sanl’jek. The 
average sanl’jek adult typically lives between 
four to six local years and in that time can bear 
more than 30 young. 

Some scholars have suggested that the devel- 
opment of communal awareness based on en- 
hanced auditory senses acts as a biological com- 
pensation for their short life span, Others theo- 
rize that the sanl’jeks may communicate with 
each other ona level hitherto undiscovered. The 
potential loss of an important part of that on- 
going communication process may likewise ac- 
count for the violent response recorded. 


Sanl'jeks—Svaper 


w Sani'jek 
Type: Communal forest herbivore 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Dodge 5D 
PERCEPTION 6D 
Hide 7D, search 8D, sneak 7D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Climbing/jumping 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Birth Pouch: Female sanl'jeks have a protective body 
cavity located between the two halves of creature’s rib 
cage area, Sanl'jek young are routinely carried in this 
protective pouch until the age of one local year. While 
being so transported the young sanl’jek will receive +1D 
protection against any physical or energy attacks di- 
rected against the parent; the large size of the young will 
give females carrying infants in their pouches a large, 
bloated appearance. 
Claws: Foot and paw claws do STR+2 damage. 
Communal Loyalty: While typically passive creatures, 
sanl'jeks will react with extreme violence if any member of 
its community is attacked. This often results in mass 
attacks by the entire community. During such frenzied 
reactions, all san!'jeks receive a +2D bonus to all physical 
attacks until the attacker is driven off or incapacitated, 
increase their Move score to 40 during such periods. Use 
the combined action bonuses on page 69 of Star War 
Second Edition to determine appropriate bonuses for 
group attacks, but increase the “number of people being 
coordinated” by three levels compared to the bonus (for 
example, it would take six sanl'jeks to get a+1D bonus, 10 
to get a +2D bonus, 15 to get a +3D bonus, etc.) 
Enhanced Auditory Sense: San\'jeks possess a specialized 
set of auditory receptors allowing them to discern the 
heartbeats of other communal members at extreme dis- 
tances (they can detect fellow pride members at dis- 
tances up to 25 or 30 kilometers). At close range, they can 
deduce aggressive or passive intent of other creatures 


Sanl'jeks-Svaper mma N Fics 


ARS™ 


through minute changes in the creature's heart rate. 
Allow sanl'jeks +2D to any search rolls when attempting to 
locate members of its own community. Similarly, +2D is 
added to any hide or sneak rolls made when attempting to 
avoid other creatures. In the presence of other creatures, 
sanl'jeks receive +3D to any Perception rolls for initiative. 
Silent Movement: Sanl'jeks can move very silently, adding 
+1D to their sneak attempts if they make only one move 
per round, 

Move: 12 (walking), 40 (frenzy) 

Size: 0.2-0.3 meters tall 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Selligore 


Selligores are aquatic mammals native to the 
temperate and tropical waters of the planet 
Corsin, a planet once famed for its swoop races 
but now notorious for a rather brutal Imperial 
crackdown (for more information, see the biog- 
raphy of Voren Na’a] in The Movie Trilogy 
Sourcebook). 

Selligores are colorful but harmless creatures. 
While their size — upwards of 20 meters long — 
can be frightening, their diet is primarily made up 
of small fish, plankton and oxygenating plants. 
Like many other watergoing mammals, they have 
incredible stamina, able to survive for hours at a 
time between breaths. However, they can also 
survive on land, if only for brief periods (they 
dehydrate very quickly and the lack of water 
pressure is extremely dangerous for them). 
Selligores have long fed and lived along the coasts 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


-WA 


of their world, primarily surviving in shallow 
waters (less than 100 meters deep), with regular 
forays to the surface. However, the animals are 
finding less and less of their habitat free for 
feeding or roaming. While Corsin’s prior govern- 
ment established large habitats for the animals, 
the current Imperial regime has chosen not to 
prosecute violations of the statutes and is autho- 
rizing development of some habitat areas. There 
is no doubt that the current population cannot 
sustain itself with the smaller feeding area. A 
number of attacks on Humans and other sentients 
have been reported. 

Selligores have largely remained apart from 
Corsin’s traditional population. One exception 
to this are the natives of the Tinn’lyi Islands, who 
have long maintained a supportive relationship 
with these animals. The Tinn’lyis will gather rich 
plant life and leave it on shore, while certain 
members of the Tinn'lyi nation will assist the 
selligores as they drag large nets behind them, 
scooping up large quantities of fish. In this way, 
the selligores and the Tinn'lyis feed each other, 
and both groups have prospered from the rela- 
tionship. Biologists have devoted much time to 
study the situation, and several scientists have 
put forth this example in their efforts to convince 
the current regime to protect and cooperate with 
the selligores. 

Selligores can live up to 45 local years (about 
42 standard years). When they are born, they are 
quite helpless. They are birthed in an air-filled 
sac. Osmosis slowly fills the sac over several 
hours, while the selligore slowly learns the rudi- 
ments of water life (young selligores can swim). 
Adult selligores do not “swim,” but are buoyant 
enough to “float” long distances. Selligores nor- 
mally stay in their territory, but some herds have 
migrated in “once in a generation” relocations, 
normally due to infringement on their feeding 
grounds. Selligores can survive in deep waters, 
but they show a strong preference for near-sur- 
face shallow waters. 

Selligores are normally found in small herds of 
five to 10 animals; males normally outnumber 
females by a factor of two to one. Selligores are 
quite territorial, and herds have been known to 
have conflicts over grazing areas, although any 
injuries inflicted in these battles are often minor. 


w Selligore 
Type: Aquatic grazing mammal 
DEXTERITY 1D 


PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 4D 

Swimming 6D 

Move: 13 (“swimming”), 4 (walking) 

Size: Up to 20 meters long, up to 4 meters tall 
Scale: Creature 

Orneriness: 2D 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design; Bill Smith 


Sensor Star 


Sensor stars are aquatic animals with five 
outer limbs surrounding a round central body. 
The central body is covered with several stalks, 
each ending with a sensory organ of some kind. 
Sensor stars, while of limited intelligence, have 
thrived in the marshes and swamplands of their 
native F’tral (homeworld of the cephalopod Iyra 
species; see Galaxy Guide 4: Alien Races, Second 
Edition, pages 56-58 for more information). They 
are normally found in clusters of upwards of 30 
individuals and feed off small reptiles, snakes, 
fish and insects. 

While they pose little direct danger to Hu- 
mans, sensor stars are often used as a primitive 
“sensor system” by some. The sensor stars emit 
subsonic tones, which seems to be the basis of 
their system of communication. While inaudible 
to the Human ear, these tones are readily de- 
tected over long distances by attuned sensors. 
There are very distinct tones that are emitted, 


Sanl'jeks—Svaper 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


63 


ranging from basic signals for such concepts as 
“food,” “danger” and “storm.” Sensor stars, being 
such small creatures, instinctively perceive any 
“large” (over a meter tall) creature as dangerous 
and will “sound the alarm” as soon as any being 
passes within 20 or 30 meters of them. Thus, 
sensors attuned to this subsonic signal can de- 
tect the “danger” signal, thereby alerting any 
security guards — all at a much lower cost than 
fully computerized security systems. 

Sensor stars seem to have an incredibly so- 
phisticated sensory system. Aside from the stan- 
dard Human auditory and visual range, they are 
known to be able to detect subsonic and ultra- 
sonic tones, infrared and ultraviolet light sources, 
as well as perceive much of the radio wave spec- 
trum. Some speculate that sensor stars can de- 
tect “disturbances in the Force,” but this remains 
unconfirmed. It is known that each stalk has a 
specific sensory organ designed to observe a 
small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
and that the sensor star uses all input from its 
stalks to form a composite image of the world 
around it. 


mi Sensor Star 
Type: Marsh creature 
DEXTERITY 0D 
PERCEPTION 0D 
Search 1D+2 
STRENGTH +2 
Special Abilities: 
Subsonic Communication: Sensor stars can communicate 
with subsonic tones, which can be detected by sensors at 


inl'jeks-Svaper LEE ee eS N AA 


ARS 


distances of up to 350 meters. 

Sensitive Receptors: Sensor stars can detect an incredible 
array of electro-magnetic communication, making them 
useful guard creatures. 

Move: 2 

Size: Up to 25 centimeters across 

Scale: Creature 


(llustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Bill Smith 


Shredder Bat 


The predator known as the shredder bat was 
first encountered on the ancient planet of Atrisia; 
unfortunately, as intelligent beings spread across 
the stars, so too have some of their more danger- 
ous foes, including this creature. 

The shredder bat is known to frequent a vari- 
ety of habitats: mountains, plains, forests, tropi- 
cal jungles and a number of other areas. Several 
distinct species are part of the shredder bat 
family, but aside from the relatively rare snow 
shredder bat, they are almost never encountered 
in frigid climates. Most of the shredder bat spe- 
cies go into hibernation during colder seasons. 

Shredder bats are pack animals known to 
achieve wingspans nearly a meter across. They 
are often found in packs of 20 or more bats, and 
frighteningly, swarms numbering inthe hundreds 
have been reported on some planets. 

The creatures are efficient hunters: their in- 
credibly sensitive hearing can pinpoint living 
creatures from several kilometers away. Using 
this hearing, they dive in on the normally unsus- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


BR crs 9101! eks- Sva per 
“WARS < —=" ——— a 


pecting prey, and inflict a devastating attack with 
their extended fangs on the target’s coronary 
artery. The sharpness of the fangs, combined 
with the velocity of the dive, often results in an 
instant kill for the attacking bat, which will then 
extend its tube-like tongue to draw in the victim's 
blood, which it uses for nourishment. 

Shredder bats rely almost entirely upon their 
sense of hearing, having no eyes. In addition to 
pronounced ears, shredder bat foreheads havea 
series of hearing organs, each subtly attuned for 
different pitches. Shredder bats also have a se- 
ries of hearing organs on their necks and be- 
tween the ears. Their brains form a composite 
image of the world around them — often giving 
them more precise perception than creatures 
with fully developed vision, They are active dur- 
ing both day and night. 

While shredder bats live and hunt in groups, 
they are far from cooperative. Swarm members 
often fight over downed animals so it is not 
unusual to find a number of bat corpses around 
the body of an unfortunate victim. They are also 
disturbingly persistent, having been known to 
track wounded targets over many kilometers 
before finishing off their hunt. 

Shredder bats typically live two to four stan- 
dard years, but the young must be strong to 
survive. Young shredder bats are fiercely pro- 
tected by their mothers, but other females fre- 
quently attack the young when the mothers are 
not there to protect them. It is believed that this 
is a predatory “mother’s instinct,” in that by 
killing off other young, a female’s own young 
might have a better chance of survival. In truth, 
the result is a species that is as dangerous to its 
own members as to other creatures, This is per- 
haps one of the few things that has prevented 
shredder bats from overrunning lightly popu- 
lated worlds where they have accidently been 
deposited. 

There has been much speculation as to how 
these extremely dangerous animals have found 
their way to so many worlds (in fact, colonies of 
shredder bats are known to exist on over 1,000 
worlds). It is believed that, in some cases, the 
bats somehow found their way into cargo holds. 
A small group of xenobiologists theorize that 
these animals may, in fact, be able to place their 
young into a special type of “infant hibernation,” 
allowing them to be placed within unsuspecting 
target animals. It is worth noting that shredder 
bat eggs are soft, jellied and less than a millimeter 
across. Female bats can lay upwards of 300 eggs 
and can reproduce up to five times in a standard 
year. Gestation period for the eggs is a mere 22 
days — making it frighteningly easy for bats to 
spread to worlds with lax decontamination and 
cargo inspection procedures. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


m Shredder Bat 
Type: Flying predator 
DEXTERITY 1D+2 


PERCEPTION 5D 

Search: tracking 7D, sneak 6D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

Brawling 3D+2, flight 4D 

Special Abilities: 

Hearing: Shredder bats have incredibly sophisticated 
senses of hearing, allowing them to build composite im- 
ages of the world around them and detect prey up to 15 
kilometers away. This is reflected in their Perception and 
related skills die codes. 

Fangs: Cause STR+ 1D damage; dive-bombing attack causes 
STR+2D+2 damage. 

Move: 18 (flying) 

Size: Up to | meter long, up to 1 meter wingspan 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Peter Venters/Design: Bill Smith 


Skeeg 


Skeegs are a species of predatory mollusks 
that live in the warm swamps and rain forests of 
the planet Vendara. While mollusks are found on 
many worlds, skeegs are unusual in the fact that, 
in their species, the calcareous shell (which is 
often considered to be the defining feature of a 
mollusk) has evolved into a series of spikes which 
protrude from the edges of the skeeg’s “wings.” 

These wings have no connection with locomo- 
tion because the skeeg’s ability to move is pro- 
duced by the muscular foot that covers its ven- 
tral surface. Instead, the wings are used by the 
skeeg to capture its prey. Skeegs feed primarily 
on large insects, which they attract by using the 
yellow-orange glands located at the anterior end 
of their dorsal surface to produce a scent similar 
to that of many Vendaran flowers. The insects 
are drawn to the skeeg by this scent and land on 
or walk across the sensitive tissue of the skeeg's 
back. When the skeeg senses the presence of an 
insect, it reaches up with its wings, grasps the 
insect, and injects it with poison through tiny 
grooves in its spikes. 

After the prey has ceased moving, the skeeg 
uses its wings to transfer the prey from its back 
to its mouth (which is located on the ventral 
surface of the skeeg, directly below the scent 
glands). During this transfer, the skeeg faces the 
risk that a scavenger will steal its prey. 

Skeegs are almost completely nonsocial. Apart 
from mating (which is triggered when one skeeg 
randomly crosses the slime trail of another), 
individuals of the species have no contact with 
each other. 

Skeegs are primarily known for their use in the 
manufacture of natural perfumes. While perfumes 
derived from skeeg scents are currently out of 
fashion, in past years skeegs have been heavily 
hunted by poachers who would harvest nothing 
but the scent glands, leaving the rest of the skeeg 


to rot on the forest floor. Skeegs are a prime 
target for this type of activity since they are 
extremely slow-moving and leave a thick trail of 
slime to mark their passage. 

The natives of Vendara (Near-Human descen- 
dants of an ancient colonization attempt) have 
legends concerning a time when their ancestors 
hunted huge sea-dwelling skeegs for meat and 
used the perfume of the skeeg as a poison. How- 
ever, the modern skeeg poses little danger to 
travelers on Vendara, as it is slow and its poison 
is relatively mild (although some individuals are 
extremely sensitive to the anesthetic qualities of 
the perfume). 

Rumors persist that criminal organizations 
and some planetary or continental governments 
have begun using specially-bred skeegs — some 
reports even claim that their poison is lethal—as 
a type of natural trap, either for hunting game, or 
for protection from intruders. 


m Skeeg 
Type: Predatory mollusk 
DEXTERITY 1D+2 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Stingers; Do 1D+1 damage (plus poison). 
Poison; The poison of a skeeg is more an annoyance than 
a true danger. Characters who make an Easy Strength roll 
suffer only a slight swelling and itching. Characters who 
fail their Strength rolls suffer a -LID penalty on all subse- 
quent Strength actions (excluding resisting damage), Both 
of these effects can be cured by either four hours of rest 
or the successful application of a medpac. 
Scent: Skeegs produce aromatic secretions which attract 
and sedate their prey. When within one meter of a skeeg, 


ie z 


Sanl'jeks-Svaper D i en 


ARS™ 


characters must make a Moderate Perception roll. Those 
who fail the roll are unaffected, but those who succeed 
(i.e. , have noticed the scent) become drowsy and suffer 
a-1D penalty on all Dexterity rolls during the time that they 
are within one meter of the skeeg and for 4-14 rounds after 
they leave the area. 

Move: 0.5 meters 

Size: 17 centimeters long 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Chuck Truett 


Slar 


The slar is a leaping predator known to inhabit 
the thickjungles and rain forests of northern Port 
Evokk. While slars are quite dangerous to those 
who are careless, they tend to shy away from 
civilized areas and are quite defenseless against 
long range weapons such as blasters (provided 
that assailants get the first blow; slars can move 
so fast that few attackers will get asecond shot). 

Aside from their reputation for ferociousness, 
slar are characterized by their bright bluish- 
green appearance. In fact, several harmless her- 
bivores on Port Evokk have a very similar shade 
of color; xenobiologists believed these animals 
evolved this adaptation because predators rec- 
ognized the brilliant coloration and mistook the 
animals for slars. 

Slars have large and powerful legs which they 
use to leap great distances, Their hooves are 
designed to dig well into the ground for addi- 
tional distance. They have long, well-muscled 
tails, and coil them around tree limbs or other 
solid objects, allowing them secure positioning 


EE Close-up of the skeeg’s poison spike. 


EA The head of a Vendaran skeeg. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


t 


— STA Sanljeks-Svaper 


while finishing off a kill. They have three elon- 
gated claws on each “hand,” as well as flexible 
membranes between each finger, allowing them 
a wide span. They use these claws to pin poten- 
tial targets to the ground (or other suitable hard 
object). Their most lethal weapon, however, is 
the crown of razored quills atop their heads, 
which quickly reduce a meal to shreds. 

Slars are doubly dangerous because of their 
behavior. While they need to feed only about 
once every three standard days, their feeding 
patterns are irregular. Sometimes a slar will go 
eight or nine days without feeding, even with 
ample food sources nearby. Other times, a slar 
will feed three or four times in a single day 
(sometimes within two or three hours), Slars 
have been known to lay, seemingly at rest, for 
hours at a time while animals frolicked mere 
meters from them, and then suddenly attack 
without warning. Their feeding frenzies are 
not for the faint of heart. 

Slars are avidly hunted on Port Evokk. While 
it is readily acknowledged that they are a public 
health threat, slars have industrial uses. Their 
quills are often used in cheap industrial razors, 
while its digestive juices are used to waterproof 
ansmul-hide boots and jackets, which are popu- 
lar in local communities. 


m Slar 
Type: Leaping hunter 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Brawling parry 7D, dodge 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 4D, climbing/jumping 6D, lifting 5D 
Special Abilities: 
Leaping: The slar can leap up to 15 meters vertically or 40 
meters horizontally (Moderate difficulty). 
Tail; Slars wrap their tails around sturdy tree limbs to 
brace themselves; when their tails have anchored them, 
they can add +1D to brawling parry, brawling and lifting, 
but they cannot dodge, nor move more than two meters. 
Claws: STR+1D damage; if successful hit, the slar rolls 
brawling while the target rolls brawling parry; if the slar's 
total is higher, the slar has used its claws to pin the victim. 
Razor Quills: STR+2D damage. 
Move: 8 (walking), 15 (leaping horizontally), 40 (leaping 
vertically) 
Size: 1.4 meters tall, 3 meters long (with tail) 
Scale: Creature 


Mustration & Concept: Tom ONeill/Design: Bill Smith 


Sliideptra 

Sliideptras are large advanced annelidians that 
live among the tree limbs of the rain forests of Tel 
IV. Physically, sliideptras have a triple set of eyes 
on each side of their primitive head. The air sac, 
which makes up most of the body's length, has 
upwards of a dozen different separate compart- 
ments, each with a distinct set of pores used for 
expelling poison gas. They are normally pale 
white or a pale yellow color (the particular shade 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


——— 


i A 


EE Slar. 


tends to be somewhat disturbing to Humans). 

Hanging from their perches, they appear to be 
harmless larvae, or perhaps even cocoons that 
are bound to tree limbs by dozens of thin ten- 
drils. In fact, they are deadly predators. 

Their soft, boneless bodies form large sacs 
which the sliideptras fill with air. They then mix 
this air with a gas produced by highly specialized 
glands, creating a deadly contact poison. Whena 
sliideptra, using its extremely sensitive vision, 
spies its prey (normally small mammals, although 
sliideptras have been known to attack the larger 
reptilians of Tel IV), it begins to make a low, 
humming sound. This sound attracts the prey to 
an open area directly below the sliideptra’s perch, 

When the prey is in position, the sliideptra 
quickly expels the cloud of poison gas, which 
paralyzes the prey and immediately begins dis- 
solving the connective tissue within the body. 


anl'jeks—Svaper 


The sliideptra then begins to lower itself down 
to the prey by unrolling its tendrils (which afford it 
a range of vertical motion spanning up to seven 
meters). As the prey dies, the sliideptra hangs just 
above the carcass and extends its snout. From the 
snout, it spits thin streams of corrosive saliva 
which further dissolve the flesh of the prey. 

At this point, the sliideptra must wait, hanging 
patiently above the carcass as the saliva contin- 
ues its digestive processes. In approximately one 
hour, the flesh of the prey has reached a semi- 
liquid consistency, and the sliideptra can begin 
to ingest it, sucking the material up through its 
narrow, toothless mouth. 

Once satiated, the sliideptra retracts its ten- 
drils and rises back to its perch. The next morn- 
ing, if the carcass remains, the sliideptra will 
lower itself and feed again, repeating this pro- 
cess every morning until the carcass has been 
completely consumed. 

Although the sliideptra looks to be easy prey, 
it has no predators. Attacking a sliideptra when 
its air sac is full results in the sudden expulsion 
of poisonous gas, and, in many cases, the death 
of the attacker. The only way to avoid this type of 
attack is to strike immediately after the sliideptra 
has already expelled its poison gas but has not 
yet had enough time to generate a sizeable dose 
of poison (which takes about 50 hours). How- 
ever, even during this vulnerable period sliideptra 
are rarely attacked because their flesh is as poi- 
sonous as their attack gas and any creature that 
consumes a sliideptra soon dies. 

While sliideptra are capable of moving slowly 
along the tree limbs (moving their tendrils in an 
undulating motion), they rarely do so, preferring 
instead to hang from the same perch for their 
entire adult lives. 


rR 
ARS™ 


The mating behaviors of sliideptras are un- 
usual in that they mate during their larval stage, 
when they are much smaller and more mobile 
than adult members of the species. During this 
short mating period, the juvenile sliideptras — 
who are hermaphroditic — exchange gametes 
with one another, but no fertilization occurs. 
Instead, the gametes are stored within the body 
and mixed with the creature’s own gametes to 
produced fertilized eggs. 

The Empire has collected many sliideptra for 
use in experiments and research concerning 
chemical warfare. Their research produced the 
paralytic grain mold that decimated Keresia, as 
well as the biological self-destruct mechanism 
used by many Imperial spies. 

The homeworld of the sliideptra, Tel IV, is cur- 
rently occupied only by a small group of Ho’Din 
research scientists. They have developed a serum 
that is effective against the sliideptra poison, but 
they have not let that information be known since 
the Ho’Din fear retribution from the Empire if the 
existence of the serum becomes known. 


m Sliideptra 
Type: Arboreal invertebrate carnivore 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Special Abilities: 
Wide Angle Vision: The well-developed eyes of sliideptras 
give them a +2D bonus to Perception for all tasks involving 
sight. 
Poison Spray: The poison of a sliideptra is a potent toxin 
(causes 7D damage). The sliideptra is only able to make 
this poison attack once every 50 hours. Characters who 
fail their Strength rolls by more than 15 points die from the 
poison. Characters who fail their Strength rolls by one to 
14 points suffer neural damage (damaging the brain's 
ability to control muscles), resulting in a-1D penalty on 
all Dexterity, Mechanical, Strength and Technical tasks (in 
addition to normal damage); this penalty lasts until a 
medpac is used (Very Difficult first aid difficulty). For 
every five hours that passes between the time of contact 
with the poison and a successful healing attempt, the 
penalty increases by an additional -1D. When the Dexterity 
penalty is equal tothe character's Dexterity, the character 
is totally paralyzed and cannot move. In addition, all 
characters who come in contact with the poison will 
suffer cosmetic damage to the exposed skin — the poison 
produces a permanent bald spot covered by smooth, 
pinkish scar tissue. 
Successful application of a medpac will counteract the 
effects of the poison, but it will not eliminate the poison 
from the character's system. For a week following the 
treatment, once every 20 hours following the application 
of the medpac, the character must make an Easy Strength 
roll. Characters who fail this roll suffer the effects of the 
neural damage again and can only be healed through the 
application of advanced medicine. 
Completely eliminating the poison from a character's 
system is a Moderate medicine task requiring access to 
commonly available serum antibodies or an Easy Ho'Din 
herbal medicines task. 
Move: 2 (up to 7 meters from tree limb) 
Size: 40 centimeters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Chuck Truett 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


DN AR Sanl'jeks-Svaper 


-WA 


Slimy Nonakara 


The nonakara is a large amphibious eel that 
lives in the lakes and swamps of planets through- 
out the galaxy. In its adult form, it is primarily a 
herbivore, but it will occasionally supplement its 
diet with fish or other, smaller, amphibians. 

It is largely notable for the quantities of slime 
that its skin produces. This slime acts as an 
irritant, weakening the plants and animals that 
live in the pool and allowing the nonakara to 
more easily feed on them. 

Unfortunately for the nonakara, this slime also 
poisons the water, eventually doing so to such a 
degree that other forms of life can no longer 
survive. At this time, the food supply of the 
nonakara disappears, and it is forced to begin 
searching for another home. 

The nonakara prepares for this search by 
covering its body with a thick layer of mud. Doing 
this slows the rate at which water evaporates 
from the skin of the nonakara and increases the 
chances that the creature will find a new home 
before it dies of dehydration. 

This journey serves an additional purpose — 
reproduction. Nonakara are solitary creatures — 
only one will live in any body of water — but, 
during these searches, the migrating nonakara 
enters any occupied pool that it encounters. 
While in the pool, the nonakara consumes large 
amounts of the polluted water and allows its 
covering of dried mud to dissolve. The nonakara 
then thrashes violently, causing a large amount 
of its slime to be introduced into the water. This 
behavior is the basis of most primitive legends 
regarding the nonakara, who are often called 
whirling serpents. 

These two activities — the ingestion of water 
polluted by the slime of another nonakara, and 
the release of slime into the pool of another — 
represent the methods by which the nonakara 
exchange genetic material. In just a few days, 
both nonakara (provided the migrating nonakara 
completes its journey) will give birth to a large 
number of offspring. 

Not long after their birth, the larval forms of 
the nonakara burrow into the muscle tissues of 
any large fish and other aquatic or semiaquatic 
animals that are found in the pool. These larvae 
will use the muscle tissues of their hosts as their 
initial food source, and will often be spread 
throughout the area by the travels of their hosts. 

It is commonly accepted that the spread of the 
nonakara through the galaxy has been caused by 
explorers who have acted as host animals for 
nonakara larvae and carried the creature far 
beyond its homeworld. 

While it is most often the case that victims of 
nonakara larvae begin displaying signs of fatigue 
in a matter of hours, it is not uncommon for the 


larvae to temporarily restrict their development 
and remain undetected in the victim’s body for 
several months before they begin feeding. In 
these cases, the victims often do not even sus- 
pect that they have become infected until after 
the unexplained fatigue begins. 


m Slimy Nonakara 
Type: Amphibious omnivore 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
PERCEPTION 1D+1 
STRENGTH 2D 
Special Abilities: 
Slime: The slime produced by the nonakaras irritates the 
skin of many other creatures. Characters who come in 
contact with the slime of a nonakara (either by being 
struck by a nonakara or by entering a pool polluted by the 
nonakara) must make an Easy Strength roll. Characters 
who succeed the roll are unaffected, but all others suffer 
1D damage for every round of contact. 
Teeth: Do STR+1D damage. 
Larval Implantation: Any being that enters a pool of water 
inhabited by a nonakara has a one in six chance of being 
attacked by a nonakara larva. When the larva attack, they 
will burrow into the character's muscles. Characters who 
are attacked will become fatigued in four to 16 hours, as 
the larva begins draining energy from the character, This 
fatigue causes the character's Strength to decrease by-1D. 
Every 10 days, the character's Strength will decrease by an 
additional -1D. 
If the character's Strength reaches zero, the character 
dies, and the nonakara emerges and 
searches for another host. 
Removing the larva is a Moderate 
medicine difficulty with access 
to surgical facilities. The 
character's full Strength can 
only be regained by 12 to 20 
days of rest in a total care 
setting. 
Move: 10 (swimming), 
2 (crawling) 
Size: 20 centimeters to 4 
meters long (depending on 
the size of the 


N 
LAY 


body of wa- WM 
ter in SS S 


which 
they 
live) 
Scale: 
Creature 


À a RNS 


N 


y 


Illustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Chuck Truett 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


69 


Sanl‘jeks—Svaper n A A Pes 


Slork 


The vile slorks inhabit the marshlands of 
Kidron. The foul smell they exude may once have 
evolved to keep the primitive ancestors of the 
Orfites at bay or may be a simple by-product of 
the organic wastes slorks consume. In any case, 
these unattractive beasts are given a wide berth 
by both native Orfites and their less sensitive 
“guests.” 

Slorks tend to remain solitary, staking out 
private territories and defending them from oth- 
ers of their kind. Any garbage, carrion or other 
wastes within these territories become food for 
these omnivorous scavengers. It is said that bod- 


ARS 


ies dropped from the High City of Refuge are 
quickly consumed by the hungry slorks below — 
dead or alive. 

Despite their ravenous hunger, slorks are not 
inherently aggressive towards other species; their 
stench is enough to discourage predators from 
bothering them. They battle each other by goug- 
ing with their heavy grubbers — dull claws that 
dredge slop into the slork’s mouth. Xenobiologists 
observing slorks (with breathers and from a 
distance!) have noticed that warring slorks keep 
their trunks clear of an enemy's grubbers, These 
sensitive organs seem to contain the creatures’ 
olfactory nerves. They rely on this sense of smell 


A Loathesome, Lonesome Beast 


“Sark!” Kendrell cursed, wishing he'd 
brought a breather. “What is that smell?” 

Deeka paused, scanning the area. “It does 
smell wretched,” she agreed, “but I’ve not 
encountered its like before.” 

The jungle gnats buzzed fitfully around the 
spacers’ heads. Kendrell swiped at them for 
the four millionth time and fanned his sweaty 
face. “Between this heat, 

these bugs 
and that 
stench, 
Maxim's 


R 


PN W% 


have to haul me out in a med-rig!” 

“Cease protesting,” Deeka muttered; “Aha! 
There it is.” 

“It” was ashambling pile of blubbery refuse, 
about a meter long and grossly fat. Black 
grubbers, glossy with slime, jutted from the 
thing’s warty paws. Even Deeka, the unflap- 
pable scout, was repulsed. A deep snort, some- 
where between a growl and a belch, rumbled 
from the thing’s belly as it reared up and 
regarded its visitors. 

Kendrell raised his blaster. “What do you 
intend?” Deeka cried as he aimed. 

“l‘intend’ to blaze that thing,” Kendrel shot 
back. “I don’t wanna become its dinner.” The 
thing in question searched the air with its 
snout. The nostrils twitched with each word 
the spacers said. 

“You'll blaze nothing, Kendrell Shell. That 
does not threaten you,” Deeka snapped, block- 
ing his shot. She felt the pilot's aura pulse with 
irritation, but he said nothing. 

The slork glistened in the filtered sunlight. 
Stench rolled off of it in waves. Deeka wavered 
a bit. “It is repulsive,” she agreed. “Let us 
depart.” 

“No question,” the pilot replied, turning 
away from the scumdigger. Out of the corner 
of his eye, Kenrell noticed something colorful 
on the ground as he turned. He looked again, 
closer. 

“Is that ...” 

Deeka glanced at the ground and shud- 
dered. “It is,” she agreed, “But the poor per- 
son has been dead for some time.” 

“Stillthink the thing’s not athreat?” Kendrell 
asked his partner. 

“Not if we leave this place,” she replied. 
“Let us go.” 

The slork watched the pair as they de- 
parted, then continued its meal in peace. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


me TA 
-WA 


as their primary sense. Although the slork have 
vestigial eyes, they appear to be almost blind and 
compensate by “breathing” vibrations from the 
air around them. A slorkwhose snout is damaged 
goes effectively blind until the injury heals. 

Slorks are strong for their size — about one 
and a half meters tall when squatting on their 
haunches — and their hides are thick with blub- 
ber. Slork grubbers average about the length of a 
Human's hand. The slork’s most potent weapon, 
however, is its infamous reek. Even through 
breathers the stench is noticeable for several 
meters. This effectively eliminates slorks from 
Kidron’s food chain — nothing else wants to eat 
them, They need not fight for their food; it comes 
to them sooner or later. 

Once a year, slorks go into mating season and 
seek each other out. It is joked that slork mating 
rituals, which involve trading choice bits of refuse, 
become too disgusting for even xenobiologists 
to observe! The young are hatched from gooey 
“eggs” laid in the swamp. These eggs resemble 
embryos without hard outer shells, and scien- 
tists have theorized that the hatchlings absorb 
nutrients through the membrane of the egg. They 
take years to reach adulthood — more than 
Humans — and live for a century or more. 


w Slork 
Type: Disgusting scavenger 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Grubbers: Do STR+1D damage. 
Stench: Nauseates organic beings (except other slorks) 
within a 10 meter radius unless the “targets” make a 
Difficult stamina roll. Breathers reduce this to a Moderate 
roll. 
Blubber: Slork gain an additional +1D to resist damage. 
Shots at their snouts circumvent this, but shooting at the 
snout increases the difficulty by one level. 
Move: 3 
Size: 1-1.5 meters tall 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Phil Brucato 


Somago 


The somago, also known as the choker, is 
another inhabitant of Tenek (also see the entry 
on the Raen sovra). Although it lives far from the 
vinna forests, it is obviously related to the Raen 
sovra because it has a similar basic structure. 

The somago is a carnivore, eating the herbi- 
vores that roam through the Tenek forests. It 
normally drops down from the trees, then digs its 
claws into the flesh of its prey and squeezes it to 
death. Somagos appear in a number of forms, and 
the form of the somago determines what the 
basis of the somago’s diet will be since certain 
forms can more easily trap and kill certain types 
of prey. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


The most common form is that of the flat sheet 
somago, These creatures look much like fishing 
nets that have hooks surrounding their edges; 
these are most effective at catching the many 
smaller herbivores of the Tenek forests (and at 
making use of any available carrion). Less com- 
mon are the saddle somago, whose rectangular 
shape is most effective at capturing the long- 
necked tils of the Tenek grasslands, and the 
tapestry somago, which snares flying creatures 
from the air, The rarest form of somagois also the 
smallest, the helmet somago. From its structure 
— a tube 35 centimeters in diameter and 50 
centimeters long, with abnormally long claws 
surrounding one end of the tube — the helmet 
somago would appear to be most effective at 
catching Humanoid creatures (which, in fact, it 
does very well, as noted in reports transmitted 
by the second REV Survey team). The anomaly 
here is that there are no animals with similar 
forms extant on Tenek. Most galactic zoologists 
speculate that the helmet somago is an evolu- 


Sanl‘jeks-Svaper 


tionary throwback to an ancient age when hu- 
manoids roamed Tenek (although, because of 
the current quarantine of Tenek, no proof of this 
theory has been found). 

After its victim is killed, the somago slowly 
feeds off the decaying body. The feeding process, 
in which the somago eats through a number of 
tiny mouths that protrude from stoma in its 
metallic shell, is inefficient, so most of the or- 
ganic material of the victim decomposes due to 
the efforts of other creatures (helping to ensure 
that the soil of Tenek is remarkably fertile). 

Since the somago feeds on organic material, 
its metal skeleton is different from that of the 
sovra. The skeleton of the sovra is smooth, but 
that of the somago is rough because it is made up 
of many individual segments, each of which con- 
tains a number of stoma. However, despite its 
consumption of organic material, the bulk of the 
somago's motive energy comes from modified 
metallic muscles similar to those of the sovra 
(which would seem to indicate that the somago 
also depends partly on electricity for its energy). 

While the somagos are not considered to be 
the galactic nuisances that the sovra are, they 
have, inexplicably, spread to a number of other 
systems. 

Certain zoologists have postulated that the 
Empire created the helmet somago through ge- 
netic manipulation; it is speculated that the in- 
tended use was as an assassin’s weapon. No 
proof of this has been found, but researchers 
have noted that the vast majority of somagos 
found outside of the Mis-Tenek system are, in 
fact, helmet somagos. 


m Somago 
Type: Modified annelidian carnivore/scavenger 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Choking Attack: lf a somago strikes the head of its oppo- 
nent, it can then perform a choking attack, inflicting an 
additional 3D of damage per round until the somago is 
killed or removed. 
Hooks; Do STR+1D damage. 
Move: 4 
Size: 50 centimeters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Chuck 
Truett 


Spor Crawler 


This small but deadly pest is native to Nar Bo 
Sholla (see Wanted by Cracken, page 60). Black 
market trade, however, has spread it throughout 
the galaxy and into the menageries of unscrupu- 
lous collectors and brutal assassins. Though tiny 
enough to escape casual notice, the spor crawler’s 
powerful poison often leads to painful death for 


nl'jeks-Svaper eee a, | = 


CSV TAR 


beings stung by its double-pronged stinger. 

Spor crawlers typically hide themselves in 
dirt or sand or scuttle into small hiding places — 
into drawers, beneath pillows, under beds — to 
await their prey. In the wild, these creatures 
gather into hives of between five to 50 individu- 
als. When some other being disturbs them, they 
launch themselves from hiding and attack en 
masse, filling large targets with their poison. The 
crawlers then feast on the corpse, laying caches 
of eggs when they are finished. Solitary crawlers 
act in much the same way; when “prey” ap- 
proaches, they fling themselves out into the open 
and sting repeatedly. Although solitary crawlers 
rarely carry eggs, investigators into sudden 
deaths often gain clues from the telltale marks 
the crawlers leave. 

A spor crawler’s sting is exceedingly painful; 
many creatures can be incapacitated by a single 
wound, and the agony suffered from multiple 
stings can only be imagined. Although simple 
medpac treatment quickly drains the poison from 
one’s system, the pain can linger for days. Lone 
victims of the crawler’s poison usually perish 
within a standard hour or less. For this reason, 
they are prized by assassins with a sadistic bent. 

Crawler anatomy is simple; large multifaceted 
eyes grant the creature a wide field of vision, 
while eight thin legs propel it quickly across 
gritty terrain. It should be noted that crawlers 
often flounder on smooth metal, plastic or tile — 
their tiny claws cannot find purchase on slick 
surfaces. Asharp “beak” and digging claws below 
the eyes allow the crawler to burrow quickly into 
soft sand or flesh. They carry their deadly double 
stinger over their backs and can sting targets 
from any angle if they are within reach. Unlike 
most insects, spor crawlers do not have a hard 
outer carapace — they are easily killed if stepped 
upon. Despite this, they are hardy creatures, able 
to adapt to nearly any environment if given time. 

In groups, spor crawlers mate whenever pos- 
sible, laying their eggs in dead prey. These eggs 
resemble tiny black pellets and hatch within a 
standard week. Young crawlers grow to maturity 
in about two months, during which time they are 
provided for by their mother. Many crawler hives 
begin as family groups; young members wander 
off if the local wildlife can no longer support the 
hive, often forming new hives with other “refu- 
gees.” Spor crawlers live for an average of three 
standard years, although they can live far longer 
in captivity. Crawlers continue to grow with age: 
the oldest (and largest) spor crawler on record 
lived for nearly 10 years and measured half a 
meter from end to end. 

Because of their traditional use as assassins’ 
pets, spor crawler ownership is strictly regu- 
lated. Many systems forbid collectors from pur- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—ST. 
-WA 


chasing spor crawlers at all, and others require 
that such specimens be registered with the local 
creature control board and be de-venomed. Nev- 
ertheless, black market sales thrive. Such a use- 
ful and deadly creature cannot be ignored by 
morbid collectors or ruthless killers. 


m Spor Crawler 
Type: Poisonous insect 
DEXTERITY +2 
PERCEPTION +2 
STRENGTH +2 
Special Abilities: 
Poison: Creatures stung by the spor crawler suffer 5D of 
damage (roll once every five minutes for one hour). The 
character must also make a Difficult stamina roll to with- 
stand the extreme pain — failing the roll means the 
character suffers a-3D penalty to all actions for the next 
six hours. A Moderate first aid roll when using a medpac 
can neutralize the poison but there is no remedy for the 
pain, 
Burrowing: Spor crawlers can dig in soft materials. 
Camouflage: If a crawler has a place to hide, a Difficult 
search or Perception roll is needed to see it before it 
attacks, Characters familiar with Nar Bo Sholla may make 
Easy survival rolls to be able to guess where spor crawlers 
are likely to be found and may reduce the search or 
Perception difficulty by two level (by knowing to look for 
telltale disturbances in the dirt or sand). 
Move: 1 
Size: 8 centimeters long 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Phil Brucato 


Stalker Lizard 


Stalker lizards are long, low reptilian omni- 
vores native to the plains of Dantooine. They are 
deep purple to blue in color (closely matching 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


2 —_ — 


=R A H J — A — 
A 4 SS = h = 


the purple-hued grasses of that world). They are 
perfectly adapted to tracking and hunting ani- 
mals in a plains environment. They have widely- 
spaced articulated limbs, which helps keep their 
bodies low to the ground (they seldom are more 
than one third of a meter tall at the shoulder), but 
they can run blindingly fast through the grasses 
(they have an immense stride). 

Stalker lizards primarily hunt during early 
morning and early evening, when temperatures 
areslightly cooler (and their favorite food, nettars, 
are more likely to be feeding and thus less likely 
to detect approaching stalker lizards). However, 
they spend much of the night combing the plains 
of Dantooine looking for suitable nettar herds to 
attack while the animals are feeding. Stalker liz- 
ards build small warrens for shelter from day- 
time heat, but as the sun begins to set these 
animals emerge from their homes and begin comb- 
ing the plains looking for nettars. In the course of 
anormal night, a stalker lizard can cover up to 50 
kilometers, and their keen sense of smell helps 
them track down nettar herds. Once a herd has 
been spotted, the stalker lizard tries to sneak up 
on the herd unnoticed and once within about 50 
meters of an animal, the stalker will make a 
lightning fast sprint toward its target. 

Stalker lizards rely on surprise to startle prey 
and then use their tails and bodies for crushing 
constricting attacks, as many snakes are known 
to do. While stalker lizards do not have a venom- 
ous bite, their jaws are strong enough to crush 
the trachea of a nettar, which is often the killing 


Sanl'jeks—Svaper 


n 


I'jeks-Svaper 


blow. Often, the nettar is down before other 
members of the herd realize what has happened; 
fortunately for the rest of the herd, stalker lizards 
will take only one kill at a time and they are 
solitary hunters, so the herd has time to flee. 


ms Stalker Lizard 
Type: Plains hunter 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 3D+2, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Constriction Attack; Does STR+2D+2 damage 
Move: 40 (sprint), 13 (normal movement) 
Size: Up to 3.5 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design; Bill Smith 


Stiltwalker 


A long-legged, quadrupedal amphibian, the 
stiltwalker is found on a large number of moist, 
swampy planets. The male stiltwalker runs 
through the mud and shallow water on its long 
legs, chasing the insects that are its prey and 
capturing them with a flick of its sticky tongue. 
Despite dwelling exclusively in a semi-aquatic 
swamp environment, the male stiltwalker cannot 
swim. 


AR 
ARS 


Female stiltwalkers were originally believed 
to be part ofan entirely different species because 
they are able to breathe water and instead of legs, 
they have slender, boneless tentacles. Female 
stiltwalkers spend their entire adult lives on their 
backs, lying on the bottom of shallow, slow mov- 
ing streams. With their tentacles waving in the 
water above them, they look almost like under- 
water plants. 

During much of their lives, the females feed by 
filtering the slowly moving water through their 
mouths and grasping larger food particles from 
the water with their tentacles, During mating 
season, breeding females are fed and protected 
by males. 

As the mating season begins, a female 
stiltwalker begins releasing brighly colored inks 
into the water, These colorful inks attract the 
attention of the males in the surrounding area, 
who begin providing food for the female by regur- 
gitating into the water above her. After the fe- 
male has stored a sufficient amount of fat to allow 
for the proper development of her eggs, she 
releases yet another color of ink which signals 
the males that it is time for fertilization. 

When amalestiltwalker senses danger, it emits 
a chirping sound that serves to warn the other 
males, so that they can combine their efforts to 
protect the female. Because of this behavior, 
male stiltwalkers can be trained (or tricked) into 
serving as guardian creatures. They cannot physi- 
cally defend anything, but their sensitive eye- 
sight allows them to provide early warnings of 
danger. 

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) hybridiza- 
tion experiments have proven beyond any rea- 
sonable doubt that all known stiltwalker popula- 
tions are descended from 
a single genetic 
source (as opposed 
to being the prod- 
ucts of parallel devel- 
opment, as are the many 
species of nafen; see 
separate entry on 
Bogan’s brown nafen). 
However, despite 
the best efforts of 
galactic popula- 
tion migration 
theorists, no one 
has been able to de- 
termine the system 
on which the 
stiltwalker devel- 
oped. 


14 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


EE y Oe SSS. Sanl'jeks—-Svaper 


RR ~ o 


w Stiltwalker 
Type: Amphibious insectivore 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 1D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Eyesight: Despite the simplicity of their other sensory 
organs, stiltwalkers possess extremely sensitive eyes and 
gain a +2D bonus on all Perception tasks involving sight. 
Force Sense: Stiltwalkers have an unusual affinity for the 
Force and Force-using sentients. When a character uses 
the Force in an area where stiltwalkers are present, a 
number of stiltwalkers (2D stiltwalkers for every die of 
control skill possessed by the Force-using character) will 
appear within five rounds and begin chirping loudly. The 
chirping will last for up to 10 minutes. 
Move: 3 
Size: 15 centimeters tall 
Scale: Creature 


Mustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Chuck Truett 


Svaper 


This vicious predator, originally from the 
Rodian homeworld, has been exported from the 
Outer Rim to the Core. Although owning a svaper 
is illegal in most systems, many wealthy citizens 
have large tanks with one or more of the beasts 
on display. Some crimelords even use their pets 
to dispose of witnesses, intruders or unproduc- 
tive employees. 

Svapers are quite fast and always hungry. 
They often wrap themselves around their in- 
tended prey, securing it in place while the svaper 
feasts. Although the predators are not particu- 
larly strong, many non-aquatic beings cannot 
gain the leverage necessary to break the 
creature's grip. Food is torn from the prey 
by strong needle teeth, then bolted into a 
long stomach deep inside the svaper's body. 
The thin spines located behind the creature's 
head and along its back often break off in the 
prey. This defensive measure, combined with 
the beast’s quick reflexes, has ensured the sur- 
vival of the species on a most inhospitable world. 

Large animals make up the bulk of a svaper’s 
diet, though some have been known to consume 
garbage, floating molds or the occasional Rodian. 
Svaper owners quickly discover their pet's vora- 
cious (and expensive) appetite. 

The outer skin of a svaper is colorful, but 
coarse and tough. Handlers have been scratched 
by the rough skin alone. Only the gills, located 
beneath a frill of spines, are vulnerable to attack. 
Beings attacking these gills hand-to-hand risk 
impaling their arms on the spines that pro- 
trude from the svaper’s back and head. 
These spines are lightly barbed, and 
very painful to remove. Svaper eyes 
are glossy black, absorbing all light 
into two giant pupils. A protective 
layer coats the eyes, screening out 


the dirt and tiny organisms of Rodian waterways. 

“Svaper wrestling” is a Rodian “sport” which 
has spread to some black market casinos. Sadis- 
tic casino owners have been known to offer a 
losing gambler quintuple or nothing if the unfor- 
tunate can kill the house svaper with his bare 
hands. Needless to say, this is a fairly sure bet. 
Nevertheless, especially quick strong-lunged 
beings have successfully wrestled svapers. Be- 
neath the tough skin, sharp spines and ripping 
teeth, svapers are quite fragile. By puncturing 
the gills, an attacker can rupture the creature's 
brain. Putting this knowledge to use, however, is 
difficult. 

These creatures are often solitary, but schools 
of them have been seen in especially rich feeding 
grounds, They spawn once a standard year, eat- 
ing the local waterways clean, Svaper eggs re- 
semble large opaque bubble clusters; each egg is 
about the size of a large grenade and hatches 
within four standard weeks. A large percentage 
of these eggs are eaten before they hatch; after 
hatching, the svapers proceed to eat everything 
within reach until they attain maturity, which 
can take from one to three standard years. Svaper 
lifespans are short — between four to eight stan- 
dard years — but the creatures grow throughout 
their lives. Captive svapers can live as long as 20 
years and attain frightening proportions. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


75 


SANIj@KS—SVAP CP en fA tes 
WARS 


A Sure Bet 


The thing coiled in the corner of the tank, bright 
colors shimmering in the dim light. Hatabbas chortled 
and motioned his guards to drag Kend Harlow to the 
edge of the pool. 

“Did you honestly think you could clean out my 
auxiliary safe and get away?” the crime boss asked, 
ripping open another pack of Cardellian mints with 
his top two arms while the lower arms crossed over 
his ample stomach. 

“Gambling’s what this place is about; I just never 
bet on things I can’t affect the outcome of.” Harlow’s 
bravado seemed strained. 

The thing in the corner shifted through the water. 
The spacer estimated its length at over three meters. 
He breathed deep, willing his heart to slow before it 
burst. 

Hatabbas’s bodyguards moved forward, eager to 
watch the spectacle. The guard at Harlow’s left unfas- 
tened the binders while the one on his right prodded 
him forward with a blaster. The odor of swamp water 
permeated the room, and Harlow breathed it into his 
stomach, expanding his lungs for the coming swim. 


“So youre letting me go?” he quipped with a lightness 
he didn’t feel. 

“Only one place you're going, Harlow,” the mobster 
replied. He popped a mint into his mouth and swal- 
lowed it for emphasis. His bodyguards laughed. In the 
water beneath them, the creature circled lazily, pre- 
paring for its forthcoming feast. 

“What if I win?” 

“If you win,” Hattabas replied, “you get to go free.” 
The guards laughed again. “But first you'll have to go 
through us.” 

“Bad odds, Hattabas.” Harlow flexed his hands, 
wringing the blood back to his fingers. “Not fair at all.” 

“Gambling’s a bad habit,” the boss replied, “and 
your time is up.” He waved and one of the guards 
shoved Harlow forward. The spacer had just enough 
time to grab a breath before he hit the water. The 
beast snapped the length of the tank, its black eyes 
meeting Harlow’s own, its mouth flashing open as it 
hurtled towards him. 

This was, Harlow decided, one of his least favorite 
days ... 


| Svaper Tough Skin: +2D to resist damage. The gills do not get this 
Type: Underwater voracious threat protection, but are Very Difficult to hit. Their skin is 
DEXTERITY 4D exceedingly rough to the touch, and painful to scrape 
PERCEPTION 2D against. 
STRENGTH 2D Move: 20 (swimming) 
Special Abilities: Size: 2-3 meters long (20-year-old adults can grow up to six 


Bite: Does STR+3D damage. 


Spines: The spines on a svaper's back do STR+3D+2 dam- 
age and remain lodged in skin until the target takes a turn 


to remove the spine. 


meters long!) 
Scale: Creature 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


Illustration & Concept: Tom ONeill/Design: Phil Brucato 


—T. 


Tantla 


Sporting a variety of colors and markings, 
consistent with the wide range of climate it is 
known to inhabit, tantlas are carnivorous scav- 
engers endemic to the planet Ealor (in the Parmac 
sector). Prized for the warmth and suppleness of 
their pelts, these forest predators are highly 
sought after by hunters throughout the Outer 
Rim Territories. Living and hunting in packs of 10 
to 12 individuals, tantlas are daylight hunters. 
They employ a combination of swiftness and a 
remarkably adaptive, sucker-tipped tongue 
(which, fully extended, exceeds one meter in 
length) to wear out and finally snag their prey. 

While principally found in Ealor’s equatorial 
rain forests, variations on the species have also 
acclimatized themselves to conditions in the 
planet’s desert plateaus and icy northern wastes. 

Family oriented creatures, tantla young are 
guided by their mothers for nearly a full year and 
are tended to by all members of the extended 
family pack. Tantla adults will mass in a group 
attack against any creature threatening their cubs. 
In such circumstances, it is not unheard of for 
numerous adults to repeatedly attack an intruder, 
regardless of personal injuries, in order to drive 
off the common enemy. 


m Tantla 
Type: Forest scavenger 
DEXTERITY 4D+2 
Running 6D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Hide 4D, sneak 4D+2 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Claws: Foot and paw claws do STR+1 damage. 
Extremely Protective: Tantla adults are uncommonly pro- 
tective of their young. When presented with a potential 
threat, they will band together as a group and fight to the 
death to safeguard their cubs. In such circumstances 
tantla adults will unhesitatingly sacrifice themselves, if 
necessary, to drive off an attacker. When presented with 
a danger to their young, all adult tantla attack with +2D to 
their Strength rolls for purposes of causing and resisting 
damage (this is due to increased adrenaline). 
Grapple Tongue: The tip of the tantla’s long tongue con- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


fe Tantia-Tymp 


tains hundreds of minute suckers used to adhere to its 
prey, aiding in the quarry's capture. A potential victim so 
caught must make a Difficult Strength to break free or 
suffer a -1D Dexterity penalty. 

Restricted Vision: Tantlas have difficulty in distinguishing 
distances and multiple objects in a three-dimensional 
perspective. Tantlas suffer a -1D penalty to any search 
rolls when a target creature is not moving. 

Tail: A barbed tailswipe does STR+2 damage. 

Teeth: Teeth do STR+1 damage. 

Move: 12 

Size: 1-1.3 meters tall, up to 3 meters long 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Tedellian Besiioth 


It has often been said that the most dangerous 
feature of Tedellian besiioths are its eyes. De- 
spite formidable claws and fangs, and thick mus- 
culature hinting at its high-gravity world origins, 
the eyes are the most frightening. Poets have 
said that looking into the eyes of a besiioth is the 
same as staring death in the face. Those cold, red 
orbs have caused many sentients to look away in 
fear ... just before the fangs draw first blood and 
the unforgiving jaws clamp down for a single, 
fatal grip. 


Tantla-Tym 


0J 


77 


antla-Tym RW. 
ARS 
Uj Yj F 
4; 
Vy 
M 
Besiioths are strongand hardy hunters fromthe coloration ranges from light brown to light green, 
vast plains of the high-gravity world of Tedel. A andits limbs areslightly longer than other breeds. 
thorough carnivore, their natural diet consists of Its can live up to 38 local years (about 43 stan- 
grazing herd animals. While they appear slowand dard years). Young are born live in litters of up to 
bulky, they are frighteningly fast, with a vicious- four cubs. The plains besiioth is also famous in 
ness to match. Their eyesight is geared toward the that it is the breed most readily adapted to 
lower end of the light spectrum, and thus they standard gravity environments. While it cannot 
often hunt by using their vision to spot heat sources, truly be “trained” for guard animal purposes, 
They have a very limited sense of smell, so their they can effectively be used as such when 
vision makes them ideally suited for plains envi- equipped withneuralinhibitor/controllers. While 
ronments. Besiioths are never naturally found in many planets have restrictions on this type of 
forest or jungle regions, but as they are often kept modification, it is known that many Imperial 
as guard beasts they may nonetheless be encoun- regimes choose to ignore violations of these 
tered in these areas (either set loose by their statutes. 
owners or they have somehow escaped). m Tedellian Besiioth 
Besiioths are known to have seven separate Type: Hi 
3 2 . ype: High-gravity hunter 
subspecies, with size and coloration marking the DEXTERITY 1D+2 
biggest distinctions. Members of these different PERCEPTION 2D 
subspecies can interbreed, although this rarely pnt 4D+2 A 
occurs in nature. [tis known that privately-funded TRENGTE ee ; 
ef Brawling 6D+2, climbing/jumping 5D+2 
geneticists have produced several new breeds. Special Abilities: 
Of particular interest is the “stalker besiioth,” Visual Tracking: Besiioths rely on vision for tracking. In 
which is reputed to have a greatly enhanced large expanses of open terrain, they can spot prey from 
sense of smell, as well as slight changes to mus- kilometers away. a en. 
lar development. The result is an animal well- Intimidating Gaze. Effectively has an intimidation score of 
cular p ant, z 7D. If the besiioth’s intimidation attack succeeds by more 
suited to mountainous and forested regions; they than 10 points, the target looks away and is incapable of 
are particularly in high demand in certain black action for the next round. 
market circles. Claws: Do STR+1D damage 
: : Bite: Does STR+1D damage 
What is universal about all of the breeds is that Mové: 12 (high gravity worda; 18 Gtandard gravity 
all besiioths are feral, dangerous hunters who worlds) 
view anything that does not attack first as a Size: Up to 2 meters long 
potential meal. Scale: Creature 
Of the naturally occurring breeds, the com- : = sa i 
mon plains besiioth is the most well-known. Its Illustration & Concept: Tim Bobko/Design: Bill Smith 
78 Creatures of the Galaxy 


on eee Tantla-Tym 


-WA 


Telkadis Hiding Tree Spider 


The taku forests of Telkadis are home to a 
particularly devious predator known as the 
Telkadis hiding tree spider. Female Telkadian 
spiders use their powerful pincerlike fangs to 
bore deep into the sides of native taku trees in 
order to lay their eggs. When hatched, the young 
spiders consume nutrients from the pulpy taku 
bark, continually burrowing deeper and deeper 
into the tree mass as they grow. Over time, 
though to all outward appearances healthy, a 
typical taku tree may house a dozen or more 
spiders lying in wait for unsuspecting forest 
voletes (a local rodent) and other warm-blooded 
creatures. While few taku trees are so infected, it 
is difficult to discern which may host these un- 
welcome predators until too late. The only clue 
which indicates the presence of tree spiders in 
the area is a distinct humming sound made by 
male Telkadian spiders as they fertilize hidden 
egg pods. Hiding tree spiders are a particular 
nuisance to foresters and loggers, and there are 
documented cases of entire colonies of tree spi- 

ders attacking if their host tree is threat- 

ened. 
While the tree spider’s bite is not 
fatal, lingering after-effects can 
included recurring nausea, tem- 
porary loss of hearing, and a 
loss ofequilibrium lasting for 
several weeks. 


w Telkadis Hiding Tree Spider 
Type: Predatory arachnid 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+1 
Hide 3D+2, search 4D, sneak 3D 
STRENGTH 3D+1 
Digging: tree burrowing 5D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Silent Movement: Tree spiders can move very silently, 
adding +1D+2 to all sneak attempts. 
Sense: Tree spiders sense prey by the presence of heat 
given off in their vicinity. Add +1D to all search rolls made 
within 20 meters, 
Camouflage: Tree spiders often burrow deep into their 
host's pulpy bark, making them hard to detect, even up 
close. Add +3D to all sneak rolls when so hidden. 
Poison: Spider bites do 3D damage; in addition, once 
bitten the victim must make a Very Difficult stamina roll to 
avoid temporary paralysis (lasting upwards of an hour), 
Move: 12 
Size: 60-80 centimeters in diameter 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept; Dan Schaefer/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Tentacle Bird of Pelemax 


The elusive tentacle bird of Pelemax is one of 
the more unusual forms of avian life found in the 
Colonies region of the galaxy. Thought to be a 
mutation by some and a hybrid life-form by oth- 
ers, these flightless jungle avians sport a pair of 
long, bluish-green tentacles along their upper 
torso in place of wings. Generations ago, native 
Pelemaxians used these creatures as personal 
mounts in time of war. They were aided by the 

creature’s fierce war cry which could 
cause consideration confusion and 
disarray in the enemy’s ranks. 
Modern-day Pelemaxians domesti- 
cate the wild tentacle bird as a ready 
means of caravan and personal trans- 
port. The tentacle bird is capable of 
sustained travel without water. Tentacle 
birds are often shipped off-world, at great 
profit, as beasts of burden for desert or 
jungle worlds where water and other provi- 
sions are scarce. Tentacle bird exports are 
fast becoming a mainstay of the local economy, 
as well as being an increasingly common 
mount on the galaxy’s wilderness worlds. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


79 


m Tentacle Bird of Pelemax 
Type: Flightless jungle avian 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Running 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Intimidation: war cry 6D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Hide 4D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Climbing/jumping 4D, stamina 5D 
Special Abilities: 
Beak: Beak does STR+2 damage 
Talons: Foot claws do STR+1D damage. 
Tentacles; Tentacles are well developed, manipulative 
appendages. These can assist the creature in swinging 
from tree to tree with a +1D for all climbing, jumping or 
running actions. 
War Cry: The creature is renown for its piercing war cry 
prior to making an attack. This cry can be particularly 
unnerving to unprepared opponents, If the intimidation: 
war cry attack gets 5 or more result points on a target, the 
target is stunned and cannot take any actions for two 
rounds, 
Water Storage: The creature can store large amounts of 


\ \ 


ARST 


water in specially developed internal receptacles located 
along the base of the neck and upper torso area. It can go 
up to one standard month without water. 

Move: 16 (running), 10 (climbing/tree movement) 

Size: 1.6-2.5 meters tall, up to 3 meters long, tentacles 
extending out to 3 meters in length 

Scale: Creature 

Orneriness; 2D (native Pelemaxians), 3D (non-native or 
unskilled riders) 


Illustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Rick D. 
Stuart 


Thanu 


Thanus, from the planet Kamur, are one of the 
few examples of high order predators who have 
adapted to life on the slopes of active volcanoes, 
They are able to achieve this state of existence 
because of the feeding behavior of their primary 
prey, a number of Kamuran species known col- 
lectively as silicavores. 

As the name implies, the silicavores eat rocks, 
and this activity is a very important facet of 
Kamuran ecology. The rocks that the silicavores 
consume contain plants and insects that have 
been encased in lava produced by volcanic erup- 
tions. When digesting these rocks, the silicavores 
actually do nothing more than break apart the 
lava shells in order to consume the organic mate- 
rial within, and this action (in combination with 
the harvesting behaviors of the silicavores) rep- 
resents the beginning the process of disintegra- 
tion that will result in the production of fertile 
soil. 

To begin digestion, the silicavores must travel 
to anearby active volcano, where the heat gener- 
ated acts as a catalyst for the biological pro- 
cesses that dissolves the rock shells, This behav- 
ior on the part of the silicavores ensures that 
there is a constant flow of organic material from 
the fertile valleys to the barren slopes of the 
volcanoes, and it is this transfer of material that 
has allowed the thanus to thrive in their inhospi- 
table environment. This is not an entirely inequi- 
table arrangement; the powdery waste materials 
produced by the thanus are constantly being 
blown into the valleys, and these wastes contain 
minerals that help to increase the fertility of the 
valley soils. 

Less easy to explain is the development of the 
remarkable “rolling feet” of the thanus. Thanus 
do not walk, crawl or even fly. Instead, they roll, 
using a specially developed musculature to ro- 
tate a number of spherical “stone feet” that are 
created early in their life cycle. 

Thanus do not hunt as individuals. Instead, a 
pack will approach a herd of silicavores and 
begin moving in ever shrinking circles until the 
silicavores become confused and the thanus are 
close enough that they can reach out with their 
tentacles and grasp their prey. The smallest of 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


antla—Tym 


— ITA 
OO 


the silicavores are pulled directly into the thanu's 
gizzard, while the larger ones are pushed into 
one of the thanu’s many (6-8) mouths. 

Thanus are asexual. When it is time for a thanu 
to reproduce, it travels away from its volcanic 
home to one of the fertile areas in the valleys 
below. After finding a suitable location, the thanu 
uses one of its whip tubes to plant a “bud” 
approximately twenty meters below the surface 
of the soil. During the early stages of develop- 
ment (50-75 days), this bud is subjected to ex- 
treme amounts of radiation from the core of 
Kamur, and this radiation precipitates “genetic 
damage” which results in mutations that act to 
provide diversity to the thanu population. How- 
ever, if the genetic damage is too great, then the 
juvenile thanu does not emerge from the soil at 
the end of this first gestation period. 

At the end of the first gestation, the juvenile 
enters an allophylic (plant-like) larval phase. 
During this phase, the thanu is immobile, pos- 
sessing an extensive, rootlike system of buried 
tentacles (instead of the ball and socket feet of 
the adult), The juvenile eats whatever comes 
within reach (the valleys being full of abundant 
plant and animal life) and begins collecting the 
rocks that are necessary for the development of 
its stone feet. 

As the juvenile thanu reaches maturity, it be- 
gins eating the collected rocks, The material 
from these rocks is ground into a coarse powder 
which is then reconstituted into the spherical 
feet that allow the thanu to walk across the hot 
surface of the volcanic slopes. This allophylic 
phase of the thanu life cycle lasts for 250 to 300 
days, and, when it ends, the thanu rises up on its 
ball feet and begins to roll towards the nearest 
source of great heat. 

Thanus themselves are of little interest to the 
galactic community, but the balls of silicon that 
form their feet are popular decorations in many 
systems and are considered to be potent charms 
by some of the more superstitious sentient spe- 
cies of the galaxy. As a result, there is a steady — 
but not very extensive — trade concerning thanu 
feet and, to a lesser extent, live thanu them- 
selves. 


m Thanu 
Type: Carnivorous volcano dweller 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 1D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 
Special Abilities: 
Heat Immunity: Thanus are extremely resistant to heat 
(giving them a +1D bonus added to their Strength when 
resisting blaster damage) and can travel across any solid 
surface, regardless of its temperature. 
Tentacles: Thanu tentacles do damage equal to the Strength 
of the thanu. In addition, when a thanu makes a successful 
tentacle attack, its target must make a Moderate Dexterity 
roll to avoid being entangled by the tentacle. Characters 


who fail this roll suffer no additional damage, but, during 
every following round, they must make a Strength roll that 
is equal to or greater than the rol) made by the thanu, or 
they will be pulled into its mouth. Ifthe character's Strength 
roll is more than 10 points higher than that of the thanu, 
then the character has completely escaped from its grasp. 
Teeth: The teeth of the thanu (which have evolved to 
crush both silicavores and the rocks that they have 
consumed) do STR+2D damage. As with the tentacles, the 
character must make a Strength roll 10 or more points 
higher than the thanu to escape from its mouth. 

Move: 4 

Size: 1.1 meters tall 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Chuck Truett 


Tresher 


Treshers are cliff dwelling avians inhabiting 
the coastal cliffs of the planet Tinallis. Found 
wherever sea life is abundant, these multi-col- 
ored creatures subsist ona steady diet of aquatic 
proteins. Despiteits ungainly appearance on land, 
in the air treshers are renowned for their aerial 
acrobatics. Treshers can often be seen circling 
high above coastal waters, using their keen eye- 
sight to spot fish and crustaceans just below the 
water's surface. As soon as a likely catch is 
observed, the tresher will dive at great speed, 
pulling up scant centimeters above the water 
with a fresh meal in its talons. 

Despite their obvious avian origins, treshers 
also show indications of a complex, non-avian 
ancestry as well. Treshers are warm-blooded 
and suckle their hatchlings. During the four month 
long development cycle, embryo treshers are 
nourished by asmall amount of milk secreted by 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


81 


the mother during incubation. In this way, a 
newborn tresher instinctively knows its parent 
at birth. Baby treshers are also aided at birth by 
a soft, fleshy snout for suckling; later the snout 
transforms into a hard beak. 

While generally content to avoid interaction 
with humanoid life forms, treshers are extremely 
territorial with strongly developed social bonds. 
Treshers mate for life, and while generally unwill- 
ing to come into contact with strangers, will 
savagely defend their mates or their hunting 
grounds against any perceived trespass. 

Treshers are vital to the ecology of Tinallis’s 
oceans; they eat a large number of blue-ringed sea 
crabs, which, if allowed to overpopulate the area, 
could starve out many other forms of ocean life. 
However, the tresher's life cycle is fragile. High 
concentrations of heavy metals and manufactured 
chemicals can significantly 

weaken 


AY 


TM Vay a Qe © Oa 
\ KA AN ANA NY 
Aw x 


\ 


intla-Tym LEO ee een LL 
ARE 


tresher egg shells and in polluted regions many 
treshers are stillborn. Treshers also have a very 
short lifespan — only about three to five years. 
As a result, the Tinallis government has de- 
clared the tresher a protected species. However, 
because of their extremely attractive plumage 
and the desire for “exotic, gourmet” dishes, many 
treshers fall victim to poachers each year. It is 
also interesting to note that many biologists have 
violated Tinallis’s laws, but with a different in- 
tent: they capture infant breeding pairs to be 
raised in a sheltered, clean environment in the 
hopes that treshers raised in captivity can breed. 
As the number of mating pairs in the wild slowly 
decreases, concerns are growing over the 
tresher’s continued chances for survival. 


w Tresher 
Type: Avian cliff dweller 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Dodge 7D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Search 6D 
STRENGTH 5D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Acute Vision; Treshers have extremely good eyesight for 
spotting prey from high altitudes. Add +2D to visual search 
rolls. 
Bite: Teeth set in semi-circular jawbone do STR+2 damage. 


“In retrospect, | suppose | must have been 
crazy to take the chances! did. Still, the thought 
of 10,000 credits for just one tresher egg, deliv- 
ered to a certain biologist on Deminol, seemed 
like a good deal at the time. 

“At the time. It wasn't worth it. 

“So what if she paid for my transport there 
and back? Yeah, it was top accommodations 
and no scrimping. She never told me it would 
be a three day hike through overgrown rain 
forest just to get to the nearest tresher rock 
nest, 

“So she provided all the equipment, even a 
blaster carbine ... she never told me | might 
wake up to find a Tinallian razorcat clawing 
through my provisions or that a direct hit with 
my carbine only made it smile. | swear the 
thing just smiled at me after J hit it! 

“Sure, she warned me it would be a rough 
climb up to where the treshers like to nest. She 
never mentioned just how sheer the rock face 
would be or that most of it was crawling with 
Tinallian cliff spiders. 1 lost count how many 
times I almost fell just trying to brush those 
bleedin’ things off me! Half way up | was figur- 
ing that I was going to ask for combat pay! 

“So, I finally make it up to the summit. I spot 
the Tresher nest. I’m in luck, I say to myself. 
Mother and father tresher are nowhere to be 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


i T AR ata- Ty 


Sanr o SSS aa oO 


Talons: Leg claws do STR+2 damage. 

Tail: When used as a tailswipe, bony-ridged tail feathers 
do STR+1 damage. 

Diving Attack: Treshers commonly attack by diving on 
prey. When making such a strike, movement is increased 
to 55 (160 kmh!) and increase attack damage by +1D. 
Move: 6 (walking), 18 (flight) 

Size: 1.8-2.4 meters tall, up to 3.5-meter wingspans 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Troos Armored Crebik 


The armored crebiks live in the cold; sub- 
arctic forests of Troos, a planet famous for its 
wide variety of arthropodal species. The crebiks 
live in the thick, knotted limbs of the Troosian 
pinnoc trees and prey on any of a number of 
smaller arthropods that live on the forest floors. 
Because these smaller species are also armored 
— covered with a thick keratin shell (as are the 
crebiks) — the crebiks have developed a unique 
method of killing their prey. 

The crebiks hang from the tree limbs of the 
forest, waiting for their prey to appear. The 
crebiks use their weight and armored shells as 
their weapon, releasing their grip when the prey 
comes into position directly below them. They 
fal] like a hammer onto their prey, hopefully 


The Ride Of A Lifetime 


seen. Just inch my way in, stick my hand in the 
nest, grab an egg and start back down. 

“Well, | get right up to the edge of the nest. I get 
the incubator pod open. I look around one last 
time just to make sure nobody's watching. I stick 
my hand into the nest ... and I get bit, right 
bloody hard! This baby tresher thinks I’m his 
afternoon meal and takes a piece out of me. They 
may be small, but they still can do some damage, 
I tell you. 

“IĮ let out a yelp and the little beastie pops its 
head up. There we are, staring at each other 
eyeball to eyeball — and then he ups and lets out 
this screech like you never heard before. Next 
thing you know, he starts hopping, screeching 
and a fluttering all around. With my injured hand 
I can’t get him out of the way to grab the one egg 
in the nest. And every time | nearly grab hold of 
that egg — that 10,000-credit egg — the little 
daverin up and nips me again ... and again... and 
again. 

“This goes on for maybe two, three minutes 
when | finally get a hold of the egg. Just as I start 
to put the egg in the incubator, this big shadow 
falls over me, the nest, and everything else in 
sight. I'm not thinking clearly by this time, so I 
just act on instinct! Rolling over on my back — 
which is quite a trick on a cliff face, if I do say so 
— my blaster in both hands, I thrust the carbine 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


killing it and breaking open the thick shell. How- 
ever, if this falling attack does not kill the prey, 
then the crebik will use its mandibles and pincers 
to finish it off. 

The armor of the crebik itself is so thick and 
strong that none of the other large predators of 
Troos can kill them without a determined effort. 
Instead, the crebiks are preyed on by extremely 
tiny insects. Every time a crebik drops from its 
perch, it runs the risk of cracking its shell. When 
the shell becomes cracked, tiny insects known as 
bahl flies crawl through the cracks and begin to 
eat the soft inner flesh of the crebik. Because the 
bahl flies are so small compared to the crebik, an 
infestation may last for several weeks before it 
kills the crebik. 

Once every Troosian year, there is a great 
migration, and all the crebiks in an area will travel 
to the nearest large body of water. At the end of 
the migration, the crebiks enter the water and 
begin to drink. The water that they consume fills 
bladders just beneath the armor plates, causing 
the armor to expand and expose the soft flesh 
underneath. In this vulnerable state, and in the 
relative safety of the water, the crebiks begin 
their mating dance. At the end of the dance, the 


upwards to fend off whatever made that 
shadow. All I remember seeing — right before 
I closed my eyes, that is — is the biggest set of 
talons I never wanted to see up close. 

“Next thing I know, there's this tremendous 
surge of wind and the sound of wings beating 
all around me. I know I’m no longer on the cliff, 
but it’s a while before I have the nerve to open 
my eyes. What I see makes me want to close 
them real tight again. All I can see below me is 
water ... lots and lots of cold, deep water. 

“Seems I'd managed to avoid getting ripped 
limb from limb when mommatresher attacked, 
but she’s holding on to my blaster ... and I'm 
holding onto it for dear life. Now, I'm being 
carried out to sea by this huge bird. 


“The end came soon enough. Maybe about 
ahundred meters out and 50 meters up, mother 
tresher lets go. I drop into the drink; by then, 
it was a relief, even if it did break my legs. Iwas 
lucky you guys were around to fish me out. 
Now, if you have that nice, dry cell ready for 
me, I'll sign this statement and go curl up ona 
nice, solid floor for a few days. 

— extract from a signed confession by 

Fendel Ramison, as dictated to Tinalian 
authorities following his arrest for violation of 
planetary conservation statutes, 


intla-Tym 


—_ 


wy’ 
H 


, 


ARS 


EE Troos Armored Crebik. 


crebiks drain the water that they have consumed 
and return to the forests. Half a local year later, a 
large number of juvenile crebiks are born. 

Crebiks do not develop their armored shell 
until after the first year of life, so the juvenile 
crebiks are easy prey both for members of the 
other species and for adult crebiks. 


w Troos Armored Crebik 
Type: Arboreal arthropod 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
STRENGTH 3D 
Special Abilities: 
Falling Attack: The falling attack of the crebik does 6D+2 
damage. In addition, potential targets must make a Very 
Difficult Perception roll to avoid being surprised by the 
attack. 
Pincers: Do STR+2D damage. 
Mandibles: Do STR+2 damage. 
Move: 6 
Size: 1 meter long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Pete Venters/Design: Chuck Truett 


Two-Headed Tortuce 


tures to be found in the Core 
region of the galaxy. These 
slow-moving but very intelli- 
gent creatures are the prin- - ; 
cipal form of amphibian life m 
found in the coastal oceans 

of Canastra IV. Little is Z 


The Canastran two-headed tortuce is \ 
one of few surviving multi-brained crea- (4 J i 


re tax 
— 


known concerning these , A 

creatures, several varieties _ - 

of which have already been . Sz 
s 


identified. Some are deep-div- 
ing sea dwellers that live off 


underwater plant life. Others are land-dwellers 
who return to the sea when local roots and other 
edible plants in a given region are exhausted. 

Lacking any known natural predators, tortuces 
are believed to be long-lived creatures with 
lifespans approaching an average of 100 years. 
All tortuces contain a primary brain in each neck- 
like appendage, and a thin, ancillary brain stem 
leading back to a primary nervous system nexus 
(which lies under the protection of the creature's 
shell). While the inner workings of this nexus are 
as yet unknown, it is suggested that the shell’s 
nexus membranes may act in some manner as a 
controller or data “sifter” that manages what 
might otherwise be conflicting impulses from the 
two, independent primary brain centers. 

This inoffensive creature is seen as a culinary 
delicacy throughout the Core. As such, thou- 
sands are harvested as a gourmet food source 
and shipped throughout the galaxy each year. 
Such hunts are made 
all the easier for 


ae, 


E Two-Headed Tortuce. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


ee Tantla-Tym 


-WA 


the tortuces are social creatures that typically 
travel in large herds. Efforts to ban this harvest- 
ing have proven ineffective. 


m Two-Headed Tortuce 
Type: Amphibian herbivore 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D+2 
Sneak 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
Brawling 3D, swimming 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Armor: Tortuce shells are extremely hard and durable and 
get +1D to resist all physical and energy attacks. 
Dual Brained: Tortuces have two distinct brain cavities. 
This permits the coordination of multiple attacks against 
would-be aggressors: the creature can make two attacks 
at no penalty; third and subsequent actions suffer normal 
penalties (the third action is at-1D, the fourth at -2D, and 
so forth). 
Heightened Smell: Tortuces sense the presence of other 
creatures primarily through a heightened sense of smell 
(+1D to any search rolls). 
Jaws: Tortuces have very powerful jaws (used to rip out 
vegetation). They cause STR+1D damage. 
Move: 4 (walking), 8 (swimming) 
Size: 0.8-1.0 meters long 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


Tymp 

Tymps are nocturnal omnivores from the 
planet Serat. Until recently, the tymps lived inthe 
many forests of the planet, eating grubs and 
insects that they dug up out of leaf mold with 
their prehensile snouts. However, the rapidly 
expanding sentient population of Serat has re- 
sulted in a sudden decrease in the amount of 
forest (and food) available for the tymps. Be- 
cause of this, a sub-species of tymp, Classified as 
the urban tymp, has developed. 

The urban tymp appears to be capable of 
eating amuch wider range of substances than the 
forest tymp — urban tymps have become scav- 
engers, entering the cities during the night and 
eating the trash of the local inhabitants. One of 
the more significant differences between urban 
and forest tymps is that the urban tymps have 
developed an enzyme that allows them to digest 
roti—a hardy, protein-rich grain that is a staple 
in the diet of the Seratians. Because of this, the 
stores of roti, which had previously been free 
from any type of animal infestation, must now be 
kept in well-protected, durasteel silos, which the 
Seratians have imported from other systems at 
great expense. 

Unfortunately, the gene that triggers the de- 
velopment of the roti enzyme appears to segre- 
gate with a gene for aggressive behavior, so the 
urban tymps are willing to enter the highly popu- 
lated urban areas of Serat and actively look for 
the silos in which the grain is stored. There has 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


been a Jarge increase in the number of incidents 
involving attacks by tymps on members of the 
Seratian population. 

In the past, the main predators of the tymps 
have been the symers — large, long haired lago- 
morphs that would dig into the burrows where 
the tymps slept. However, their population is 
shrinking because many Seratians believe that 
the organs and appendages of the symers can be 
made into powerful charms and potions. Be- 
cause of the decline in the number of symers, and 
the increase in the amount of readily available 
food due to the development of the roti digestive 
enzyme, the population of tymps on Serat is 
exploding. 

When faced with danger, forest tymps will run, 
but the more aggressive urban tymps will often 
stand, beating the ground with their tusks and 
tossing dirt into the air before they attack. 

Tymps forage as individuals, but during the 
first hours of twilight, they will gather together 
into large social groups. During these groupings, 
both the males and the females engage in mating 
battles. While males rarely die during these con- 
flicts, females often do because the tusks of the 
females are larger that those of the males. In 
addition, the population distribution of the tymps 
is such that there is a much larger number of 
females than males, so competition among the 
females is keener. 

There have been several attempts to solve the 
problems of the overpopulation of the tymps on 
Serat. A number of traders have attempted to 
create markets for tymps, both as pets and as 
meat or hide animals, but these have all been 


unsuccessful. Currently, the solution preferred 
by the Seratians is slaughter, and many young 
Seratians spend their leisure time at the edges of 
the forest hunting tymps with crossbows and 
sporting blasters. 

Although trading in tymps and tymp produc- 
tion has consistently been shown to be an unsuc- 
cessful venture, members of the Serat Trade 
Office continue to promote it to any trader that 
they encounter, Because of this, there is a chance 
that characters will occasionally encounter a 
trader or speculator unlucky enough to be carry- 
ing a hold full of tymps. 


2 TAR 


m= Tymp 
Type: Nocturnal forager 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 1D+1 
Special Abilities: 
Night Vision: Tymps have extremely good night vision and 
receive a +2D bonus to all Perception tasks undertaken in 
low light conditions. 
Tusks: Tymps fight with their tusks, which do STR+1D 
damage. 
Climbing: When under extreme stress, tymps will use their 
prehensile tails to climb trees, adding +2D to their climb- 
ing skill. 
Move: 10 
Size: 0.7 meters (plus 0.7-meter tail) 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Chuck Truett 


L” a 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—sTA 
-WA 


E Voroos-Wrix 


Voroos 


Voroos exist on a large number of planets and 
can live in almost any environment. They are 
predators, but instead of relying on speed to 
capture their prey, they rely on subterfuge, con- 
cealing themselves by mimicking natural geo- 
logical features. 

Voroos are large, legless reptiles who possess 
extremely strong and dexterous tongues which 
they use to capture their prey. When a likely 
target comes within range, they open their mouths 
and extend their tongues like tentacles, wrap- 
ping them around the target and pulling it into 
their gaping mouths. 

Voroos are most commonly found in moist 
areas, such as bogs and marshlands, where they 
are mistaken for mossy hills or submerged tree 
trunks. There have been reports of voroos being 
found in deserts (disguised as bare stones or 
sand dunes) and in frozen wastelands. 

As voroos are generally immobile, zoologists 
are puzzled as to their methods of reproduction. 
The current accepted theory is that the palak, a 
tiny, almost microscopic flying beetle, shares a 
large amount of genetic material with the voroos. 
The palak exchanges genetic material with 
voroos, and then carries fertilized gametes 
to new homelands. This process has 
been the subject of some study, but is 
still not fully understood. 


m Voroos 
Type: Stationary predator 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D/6D/8D (Depending on size) 
Special Abilities: 
Camouflage: Voroos are often mistaken for 
small hills or other geographical features. 
Because of this, characters must make a 
Difficult Perception roll to notice the pres- 
ence of the voroos before the voroos 
makes its initial attack. 
Tongue: The tongue of the voroos does 
STR+1D damage. When the voroos 
makes a successful attack with its 
tongue, it will attempt to grasp its tar- 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


ae ` 
—— 


get. The target character should makea brawling parry roll 
versus the Dexterity of the voroos. If the character's roll is 
higher, then the attempt to grasp is unsuccessful. Charac- 
ters that have been grasped by the voroos are then pulled 
into its mouth during the next round. Characters can 
attempt to prevent themselves from being pulled into the 
mouth of the voroos by using their Strength versus the 
Strength of the voroos. 

Teeth: The teeth of the voroos do little damage (one half 
of the creature's Strength), but they do make it extremely 
difficult to extract objects from the mouth. Attempts to 
free a character from the grasp of the mouth of a voroos 
results in an additional 3D damage. 

Move: 0 

Size: 1-10 meters in diameter 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Tom ONeill/ 
Design: Chuck Truett 


Voroos—Wrix 


20s—Wrix SSS Oy fk Wes 
Sag Sa ea aa 


ARS 


The Xendrite Plague of Jacelle 


Yosev Seville could not help but shudder 
that first time she stepped out under the dark 
midday skies of Jacelle. “Stones in space,” she 
swore, covering her mouth and nose with her 
respirator before the wretched smell of 
xendrite feces could fill her lungs. 

The Sirdar Governor, a local Human — one 
of the planetbound, as Yosev saw him — 
nodded his old gray head slowly. “Indeed,” he 
said. “We traded one curse for another.” 

The sky was filled with flying shapes, the 
wings of the xendrites forming wide isosceles 
triangles that covered the skies as the flocks 
traveled from perch to perch, searching for 
insects in an atmosphere that was suddenly 
empty of nourishment. 

Yosev slipped the strap of her rifle from her 
shoulder, and pointed it towards the sky, paus- 
ing in the smooth, practiced motion only to 
aim. Her finger on the trigger of the BlasTech, 
she stopped, then turned her face to the gov- 
ernor. She kept her eyes locked with his as she 
fired a random shot into the skies, and they 
both stood there in the plaza, still, as the dead 
body of the xendrite fell to the ground. 

“You dirtboys try eating these things?” she 
asked. “Cure the meat and you won’t have to 
worry about your dying crops anymore.” 

The governor turned pale. “I have eaten 
many strange dishes as a diplomat,” he an- 
swered. “Ihave even eaten the tiehn slugs that 
the Hutts so favor. But | had never before 
eaten anything as vile as the flesh of these 
monsters.” 

Yosev shook her head again. The 
planetbound never understood ecology like 
spacers did. A spacer looked at everything as 
a closed system. A spacer didn’t forget that 
every solution came with its own set of prob- 


Winged Xendrite 


While the winged xendrite is native to Xend, it 
has been exported to many different planets in 
attempts to control infestations of insects and is 
now found throughout the galaxy. 

The hunting strategy of the winged xendrites 
is much more like that of amphibians than avians. 
Using their relatively small legs as hooks and 
securing themselves with their coiled tails, the 
xendrites hang from tree branches (or artificial 
structures when in urban areas) and catch in- 
sects using their sticky tongue. Early reports on 
the xendrites assumed that they were using a 
sieve or net strategy, flicking their tongues out at 
random and catching insects by chance, but 
closer studies have proven that the xendrites 
are, in fact, choosing specific targets, and they 


lems. A spacer wouldn't fill her ship with 
poison gas just to kill a few zhat bugs. 

She looked at the governor. He was soft and 
old and she had no sympathy for him or his 
planet. A spacer — even a child — would have 
realized that bringing a population of xendrites 
to a planet with no adequate predators but an 
extremely rich source of nourishment would 
result in almost instant overpopulation prob- 
lems. She began walking towards the body of 
the dead xendrite, picking her way carefully 
across the filthy plaza. 

“Why didn’t you let the planet deal with the 
bugs?” she asked. 

“We were afraid,” the governor answered. 
“Diseases were everywhere. The crops were 
being eaten.” 


strike these targets with a 98% accuracy rate. 

The most common reason for the introduction 
of xendrites into a planet's ecosystem is to con- 
trol the spread of insect-borne diseases. Unfortu- 
nately, the ecological balance of a planet is much 
more complex than most individuals assume, 
and the introduction of a new species usually 
produces more problems than it solves. 

The winged xendrites have no natural preda- 
tors on Xend. Instead, their population is con- 
trolled completely by the amount of available 
food. An increase (or decrease) in the insect 
population is immediately followed by a propor- 
tional change in the population of xendrites. 

However, this system of ecological balance — 
which works so well on Xend — is not sufficient 
to control the population of xendrites on many of 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


-ST AR VO OOST 


Yosev glared at him. “So now you're going 
to starve becåuse the crops are covered with 
highly acidic fecal material that’s burning out 
the chlorophyll. Even if that wasn’t happen- 
ing, the xendrites are so thick in your skies 
that they block out so much ultraviolet light 
that the crops can’t survive anyway.” 

“Yes,” the governor answered, turningaway, 
staring at the stained tiles at his feet. 

The xendrite that Yosev had killed lay in a 
puddle of feces. With the toe of her boot, she 
flipped the body over. Good, she thought. One 
shot, one dead xendrite, We shouldn't have any 
problems clearing the skies. 

“Can you help us?” the governor asked. 

Yosev looked at him, practicing her look of 
disdain, the look that her father was so good 


a A 
Ys % 
j f- Sant 
| / : 
y 
ya 


the planets to which they are imported. In most 
cases, a planet which had previously complained 
of having too many insects soon finds itself to 
have far too many xendrites. 


w Winged Xendrite 


Type: Repto-avian insectivore 
DEXTERITY 3D 


PERCEPTION 4D 

STRENGTH 1D 

Special Abilities: 

Eyesight: Because of the minuscule size of its prey, the 
winged xendrites have exceptional eyesight and gain a 
+2D bonus on all Perception tasks involving sight. 

Move: 30 (flying), 2 (crawling) 

Size: 40 centimeters long, 80 centimeter wingspan 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Chuck Truett 


at. Inless than 30 seconds, the governor began 
to cower. “Please,” he said quietly. 

“Twenty-five,” she said. 

The governor let out his anxiety in a long, 
thin breath of relief. “Thank you, thank you. 
Twenty-five thousand credits is a small price 

Yosevinterrupted him. “You're right, 25,000 
is a small price. | meant 25 million.” 

The governor turned pale, and his breath- 
ing became fast and shallow again, but he 
nodded. “Of course,” he said. 

“Do you agree to 25 million credits?” Yosev 
asked. 

“Yes,” he answered, “I agree.” 

Yosev switched off the vocorder that she 

carried in the leg pouch of her flight suit. “It's 
a deal,” she said, smiling at him, and 
briefly looking like the teenage girl 
that she was. “Tell your people to 
find cover.” Yosev activated her 
comlink and began to walk back 
towards her shuttle. “Everything's 
set,” she said. “Send the boys 
down.” She laughed. “Just wait 
till I get out of the way.” 
“What's so funny, Yos?” was 
her brother’s answer. 
“TIl tell you when | get there,” 
she answered, laughing again as 
j she pictured the dirtboys leav- 
j ing their shelters, and stepping 
out into a world covered with a 
thick layer of dead xendrites. 
It should be worth another five 
* million to clean it all up, she 
thought. 


Wrix 


The wrix is a mountain-dwelling carnivore 
most distinctive for its mention in a popular but 
unsettling Corellian fable about two reckless boys 
who disobeyed their parents: 


“.., and as the wrix bit off their heads and 
nibbled their toes, 

Kribben and Zibben knew why there was where 
no one goes ...” 


While xenobiologists have done their best to 
promote the notion that the wrix, like most ani- 
mals, acts from instinct and is neither “good” nor 
“evil,” their efforts have done little to counteract 
thousands of years of folklore about the fero- 
cious animal. 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


89 


s—Wrix 


AR 
ARS 


local citizens’ groups make eliminating wrixes 
from inhabited areas a top priority. 

Wrixes have spread to many inhabited worlds, 
and are known to prey on banthas and other 
domesticated herd animals. Wrixes are very ter- 
ritorial and are known to drive other animals 
from their hunting grounds. When confronting 
larger predators, wrixes are known to attack in 
packs. On some worlds, wrixes have been known 
to develop a taste for Humans, and there are 
several recorded incidents of packs of wrixes 
attacking camps or small settlements at night. 
Wrixes will hunt most targets at any time of day 
or night, but all known attacks on Humans or 
other sapients have occurred at night — some 
scientists have speculated that this may indicate 
that wrixes are far more intelligent than was first 
believed. 

There are several familiar wrix sub-species, 
the most common of which are the gray wrix 
(adults mass around 80 kilograms and measure 
up to 2.5 meters long from nose to tail). There are 
several less common but larger sub-species, in- 
cluding the Corellian wrix (which is also dark 
gray, but has larger ears and is much more fero- 
cious than other breeds) and the reddish-brown 
Tanthior wrix (this breed is up to 3.5 meters long, 
and, with longer legs and faster ground speed, is 
perfectly evolved for pursuing herd animals). 


m= Common Wrix 
Type: Mountain-dwelling carnivore 
DEXTERITY 1D 
Brawling parry 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 3D, sneak 3D+2 


STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 5D, climbing/jumping 4D+1 

Special Abilities: 

Claws; Do STR+1D damage 

Wrixes have earned their reputation, and their Howl: The piercing how! of the wrix is enough to terrify 

aggressive hunting patterns often leads them to many creatures. The wrix uses its howl to intimidate its 
the fringes of settlements. While their favorite targets (acts as intimidation 5D) before attacking. 
prey in the wilderness tends toward small ani- ssn te 25 meters long 
mals, when living near civilization they quickly Scale: Creature 
develop a taste for domesticated pets, much to 
the dismay of the pets’ owners. Needless to say, IJustration & Concept: David Plunkett/Design: Bill Smith 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


—IT: 
-WA 


E Yeomet-Zuxu 


Yeomet 


Yeomets live in artificial worlds, either space 
stations, large starships or totally urbanized plan- 
ets. Given sufficient time, they can dig through 
almost anything and can eat anything organic 
(and much that is considered to be inorganic). 
They have been known to infiltrate kitchens, 
food processing and storage units, eating not 
only the stored foodstuffs, but also food prepara- 
tion equipment and storage containers. They 
regularly feed in waste disposal areas as well. 
While these incidents can often be dismissed as 
inconveniences, yeomets also have a habit of 
chewing through power cables and data transfer 
wires, causing serious damage (including electri- 
cal fires). 

The ability of the yeomets to eat such a wide 
variety of materials (including monocellulose 
compounds) is dependent ona digestive enzyme 
that can only be activated in the presence oflarge 
amounts of electromagnetic radiation, Without 
this enzyme, yeomets are capable of only digest- 
ing a small range of plants-and animals, 

Many individuals find yeomets to be frighten- 
ing in appearance, but attacks by yeomets are 
rare — confronted yeomets usually flee, Only 
when a yeomet is cornered and has no 
means of escape will it attack, 

While attacks are rare, they 
are also extremely danger- 
ous. The primary 
attack 


mode of ayeomet is a biting attack, and while the 
teeth of a yeomet are not notably sharp, the jaws 
are extremely strong, and the blunt trauma dam- 
age is substantial. In addition, yeomets carry a 
wide range of diseases and any injury caused by 
a yeomet is a likely source of infection. 

Yeomet social behavior is extremely simple. 
The yeomets gather together in non-hierarchial 
herds of not more than 30 individuals and scav- 
enge together for eight to nine hour periods. 
Following each scavenging period, the yeomets 
form a large pile in which they sleep for approxi- 
mately four hours. There is no organizational 
structure to the sleeping pile — individual 
yeomets enter the pile at random, and those on 
the top and edges of the pile (who would, in 
similar behaviors performed by other species, 
most likely be designated as guardians or watch- 
ers) appear to sleep as soundly as do those in the 
center of the pile. 

The only exception to this behavior occurs 
during sleep periods in which a female is going to 
give birth. Such a female is always on the bottom 
of the pile — 


Yeomet—Zuxu 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


91 


SS ee ee eee 


some behaviorists postulate that the added 
weight pressing down on the female assists her in 
her labor, 

Newborn yeomet pups are accepted into the 
herds as the offspring of the herd, not as the 
offspring of any individual, eliminating the in- 
stinctive reproductive competitiveness that, in 
other species, often results in infanticide. 

Yeomets began to thrive largely because their 
natural predators could not adapt to urban life. 
As it is now, the only creatures that prey on 
yeomets are sentient creatures. In fact, in some 
sectors, yeomet exterminators are as well re- 
spected as are the members of the local law 
enforcement agencies. Exterminators will often 
track a yeomet herd for days, studying its forag- 
ing and sleeping patterns, in an attempt to pre- 
dict the possible locations of future sleeping 
piles, since these sleeping periods represent the 
most effective times for exterminations. 

Yeomets have been used in medical research 
throughout the galaxy because their digestive 
and lymphatic systems are remarkably similar to 
that of many reptilian sentient species. They 
have also been bred as pets, although these 
domesticated yeomets are much more docile 
and unintelligent than the naturally occurring 
yeomets. Members of the Jenet species, in par- 
ticular, are known to enjoy keeping yeomets as 
pets. 

Many bureaucrats have attempted to recast 
the destructive tendencies of yeomets as ben- 
efits. There have been instances in outlying space 
stations where the station government has de- 
creased its garbage disposal service upon hear- 
ing of the presence of yeomets, under the impres- 
sion that the yeomets themselves would dispose 
of the excess refuse. Despite the fact that these 
incidents almost inevitably lead to trag- 
edy (due te.the ability of the yeomets to 
spread disease), rumors persist that 
scientists are working to develop 
yeomets that are even more efficient 
at consuming garbage, and could, 
ultimately, supplant all other 
methods of garbage disposal. 


ARS 


m Yeomet 
Type: Urban pest 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 1D+1 
Special Abilities; 
Teeth: Do STR+2D damage. 
Claws: Do STR+1D damage. 
Disease Transmission: Characters bit by a yeomet must 
make an Moderate stamina orStrength roll to avoid becom- 
ing diseased. Diseased characters become wounded at 
the time of the onset of the disease (2D hours following the 
time of injury). 
Move: 8 
Size: 60 centimeters tall 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design; Chuck Truett 


Yo'uqiol 

The Yo’ugiol (pronounced “Yo-o00-qui-ol,” 
which is Rodian for “Hand of Death”) is a carnivo- 
rous plant found throughout the swamps of Ooo- 
sek, one of the first Rodian colonies. It is known 
that the Rodians selected this planet for what 
they treasured most — creatures suitable to be 
hunted. The yo'ugiol, while far from the most 
dangerous of Ooo-sek’s many dangers, is notable 
for its abundance and resiliency, as well as for 
how it has been “utilized” by the Empire. 

Yo'ugiols seem to be true hybrids of tradi- 
tional plants and animals. They extend “roots” 
and can draw nutrients from only soil, water, 
light and carbon dioxide. They also reproduce 
through the use of spores. 

However, they seem to derive much greater 
nourishment from consuming animals that blun- 
der within its range — as they are similar in 
appearance to many harmless plants on Ooo- 
sek, many animals do not even notice their pres- 
ence. However, the yo’ugiol’s long ten- 

drils can detect minute changes in tem- 

perature, as wellas motion and sound. 
When an animal closes within range, 
the tendrils jab out with a light- 
ning fast strike, injecting a po- 

tent poison into the target. As 

the animal quickly suceumbs 


WW to the poison, the 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


BR ces Ý CONCAU 
SS Eee 


-WA 


yo'uqioluproots itself and uses its roots to scuttle 
over to the animal. Releasing a digestive acid, the 
animal is quickly broken down into a readily 
digested paste. 

Due to the richness of Ooo-sek’s jungle re- 
gions, yo'uiqols seldom have to move far to enjoy 
arich diet. In fact; ifattacked, they are ill-equipped 
to flee, and must rely solely on their poison 
tendrils for defense. 

Yo’ugqiols are infamous for their resiliency. 
Unless completely destroyed, yo’uqiols will re- 
grow within just a few weeks. It is known that 
fertilized spores can remain dormant for up- 
wards of seven to eight standard years before 
beginning to grow, 

A yo'uqiol, once the growth cycle has started, 
will be capable of feeding on animals within three 
to five standard weeks, and there is virtually no 
limit to how large they can grow. While most 
yo'uqiols will seldom be more than 30 centime- 
ters across (and even at this size, they can present 
a legitimate danger to the unwary), Rodian hunt- 
ers who have returned from the most isolated 
regions of Ooo-sek’s jungles claim to have seen 
yo'uqiols nearly five meters across! 

Aside from their native Ooo-sek, yo’uqiols have 
been exported off-world by aggressive munitions 
companies (under the direction of the Imperial 
governor). It is known that several Imperial facili- 
ties have implanted yo'ugiols around their perim- 
eters to act as primitive (and cost effective) “land 
mines.” It is widely suspected that several private 
companies and individuals are using yo'uqiols ina 
similar fashion. 

m Yo'ugiol 

Type: Carnivorous mobile plant 

DEXTERITY 0D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 1D 

Brawling 3D = 

Special Abilities: 

Poison Tendrils: Do 5D damage. 

Digestive Acid: Does 4D+2 damage. 

Move: 2 

Size: Normally up to 30 centimeters across 

Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Dan Schaefer/Design: Bill Smith 


Zuxu 


Zuxus are a particularly nasty surprise to 
the sportspersons who visit the lakes and rivers 
of Ganlihk’s northern hemisphere. An angler’s 
challenge by day, bynight this carnivorous “lung- 
fish” is not above turning the tables by padding 
into a fishing camp for a midnight snack. 

Zuxu have a special gland that secretes a 
protective oil over the surface of its body. This 
protective screen keeps the outer skin moist for 
up to three hours at atime, allowing the creature 
to range far out of its natural environment. Its 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


specially padded front flippers have adapted to 
serve as an effective means of locomotion out of 
water. Combining this with a set of sharp teeth 
makes the zuxu a most unwelcome surprise. 
Though typically solitary in nature, in the ab- 
sence of normal aquatic food supplies, large 
numbers of zuxu can occasionally “band” to- 
gether to strip an area clean of any small animals 
unlucky enough to be out at night. 


w Zuxu 
Type: Aquatic carnivore 

DEXTERITY 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Sneak 3D+1 

STRENGTH 2D 

Swimming 4D 

Special Abilities: 

Teeth: Zuxu teeth do STR+3D damage 
Move: 18 (swimming), 3 (walking) 
Size: Up to 1,1 meters in length 
Scale: Creature 


Illustration & Concept: Mike Vilardi/Design: Rick D. Stuart 


The One That Didn't Get Away ... 


“You must understand, doctor, that | first 
agreed to go on this vacation because | knew 
I needed a rest. The factory’s production was 
finally up to quota so I thought it would bea g- 
good time to get away for awhile. Hendrixen 
suggested a nice, quiet bit of harmless fishing 
on a secluded lake over on Ganlihk, I figured, 
why not? So I rented some gear and we hov- 
ered in without any problem. 

“It started the very first day, don’t you 
know. We were out on the lake — what a 
beautiful spot it was — so nice and serene. 
We'd been out that morning for maybe an 
hour when! first noticed Him. Who? Why, Him. 
The fish! The fish in the water. I noticed how 
He kept circling the boat. Around and around, 
like He was trying to m-make up his mind 
about something. I mentioned it to Hend’ but 
he said he never saw anything. But He was 
there, I tell you. 

“Oh, He went away after a while and I man- 
aged to doze off, but He came back again. He 
came back and stuck his head right up out of 
the water. | realize now He wanted to get a 
good look at me. He wanted to remember what 
I looked like! I yelled at Hend’ but he just said 
it was my imagination. But I knew better. 

“You see, that night, after we'd finished 
dinner and turned in for the night, I heard Him. 
I heard Him jumping in and out of the water. 
<Splish, splash, splish, splash.> 

“He'd already made up his mind, don’t you 
know. He'd already decided He was going to 
come after me. At first I tried not to think about 
Him. I tried to-go to sleep but it was hopeless. 
I knew He was out there... out there biding his 
time. 

“About midnight, [heard this strange sound. 
At first, I thought it was just Hend’ snoring 
away, but as I listened closer I could tell it was 
something else. <Paddle plop, paddle plop.> 

“And then I heard this awful, crunching 
sound. After a while | couldn't take it any 
longer so J got up and went outside. I played 
my glow rod over the campfire and there He 
was! He'd come for me, just like I knew He 
would. He'd waited until we were asleep, you 
see, then He crawled right out of the water, 
padding along on his flippers, looking for me. 


He was finishing off the last of our afternoon's 
catch when | spotted Him. When the light hit 
Him, He stopped His infernal crunching and 
started right after me. 

“He was fast, I'll give Him that, but I was 
faster! He came after me, but | made it into the 
woods, He started searching for me. Once He 
almost got me, but I was too smart for Him. I 
reasoned He couldn’t climb a ryless tree and 
that’s where I had Him! Up | climbed, fast as I 
could, and there He was, down below, looking 
up at me with his huge jaws opening and 
closing over and over again. I kept throwing 
seed cones at Him until He finally paddled 
away. Hend’ found me later that morning. He 
didn’t believe me, I know. But I'd survived. I 
was the victor! That's what was important. 

“Afterwards, | told Hend’ I planned to go 
back into town and get a blaster. I told Hend’ 
that he had no reason to be afraid. I'd protect 
him from that cursed creature. I know my duty 
to my fellow man, you can believe me on that 
score. I'd be ready for Him when He came 
again, I said. And He would come back again, 
doctor! I knew He’d want to even the score. | 
knew it! 

“So you see, doctor, there’s really nothing 
wrong with me. | admit | may have over-re- 
acted a bit when I started planting wire traps 
along the edge of the lake. As I think back on it 
now, it would have been much better to let the 
monster come ashore again, let Him get real 
close this time, and then let Him have it! Make 
one rare trophy I can tell you! Show it to Hend’ 
| would. I'd show him. I'd show all of you! I'm 
really very good with a blaster, you know. If 
you take these cuffs off, | can show you. Just 
throw a fish up into the air and I'll hit it, dead 
center before it hits the ground! Just try me, 
you'll see. You don’t have any fish on you, do 
you doctor? 

“No? Well, that’s all right. Actually, we seem 
to be m-making considerable progress. | do 
wish you'd loosen these straps a bit though, 
doctor. I'm Really Much Better, you know ...” 


— extract from recorded conversation with 
Patient 3287, Londori Mental Facility, Doctor 
G.L. Kisheb, presiding. 


EEE ——— 060 Seo 


Creatures of the Galaxy 


CREATURES 
OF THE GALAXY 


Inspired by the illustrations of Tim Bobko, 
Tom ONeill, David Plunkett, Dan Schaefer, 
Pete Venters and Mike Vilardi 


By Phil Brucato, Bill Smith, Rick D. Stuart 
and Chuck Truett 


The creatures of the Star Wars galaxy populate the 
wondrous worlds of the evil Galactic Empire! Inside, 
readers will get their first glimpse of lethal svapor 
“swamp demons,” playful onahks and the terrifying 
deep space creatures known as “miner's horrors,” 


In all, over 60 new creatures are presented! Each 
entry features a detailed illustration, as well as com- 
plete information on the animal's habitat, behavior 
and special abilities. 


A must for all fans of the fantastic creatures of the 
Star Wars universe! 


A ULES VAN RSS 
CME Scanned by Ali 


For ages 12 and up. 


®, TM & © 1994 Lucasfilm Lid, (LPL), All Rights Reserved. 
Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization, 


WYUWWEST 0-87431-221-3 $15-00 
(END 
| 


40080 


