Ga 


TASTIC TECHNOL 


OG 


T 


Yo B 


DESIGN 
Drew Campbell, Eric S. Trautmann 


DEVELOPMENT AND EDITING 
Eric S. Trautmann 


ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Bill Smith, Drew Bittner 


ADDITIONAL EDITING AND MATERIAL 
Peter Schweighofer, Jennifer Seiden, George R. 
Strayton, Paul Sudlow 


PLAYTESTING AND ADVICE 


Eileen Campbell, David Eoff, Scott Hartsman, Johannes 
Huber, Patricia Jackson, Alex Jimenez, Heidi Kobara, 
Don Neske, Tim O'Brien, Matt Schaerer, Chad Schwein, 
Jae Walker 


TECHNOLOG Y 


GRAPHICS & COVER DESIGN 
Tim Bobko 


COVER ART Dave Dorman 


C 


INTERIOR ART 
Storn A. Cook, David Deitrick, Johannes Huber, Joe 
Johnston, John Paul Lona, Mike Manley, Ralph 
McQuarrie, Joey Robinson, Doug Shuler, Chris Trevas, 
Christina Wald, Thomas Woods 


SPECIAL THANKS 
The designers would like to express their thanks to the 
many designers--far too numerous to list here--whose 
droid designs appear in this volume. 


FAN T AS T 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter 
Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter 
Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran 
Editors: Peter Schweighofer, Bill Smith, George Strayton, 
Paul Sudlow, Eric S. Trautmann 
Editorial Assistant: Jennifer Seiden 
Graphic Artists: Tim Bobko, Tom ONeill, Brian Schomburg 
Sales Manager: Jeff Kent 
Sales Assistant: Carl Klinger 
Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden 
Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill 
Accounting: Karen Bayly, Mary Galant, Wendy Lord 
Billing: Sue Hartung 


STAR. WARS: 


WEST END GAMES 
RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale, PA 18431 


Editorial: WEGEdit@aol.com Art: 
WestEndArt@aol.com Sales: WEGSales@aol.com 


O, TM & © 1997 Lucasfilm Ltd. [LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by 


West End 
Games under authorization. 


C Y NABAR 


1: Droids in the Galaxy ...............e 4 


2: The Owner's Manual .................... 22 


3: Roleplaying Droids .................006 39 


The Droid Datalog 


First Degree Droids .................:::0008 48 
Second Degree Droids ..................66 59 
Third Degree Droids .................:.0006 73 
Fourth Degree Droids ..................00 79 


Fifth Degree DroidS ...............:c0cc0 87 


The starship battle raged as if it had a life force 
of its own. Many ships had been lost to both sides 
already and the Alliance and Imperial 
commanders alike knew that the Rebels didn't 
have an inexhaustible supply of fighters (the 
Imperial Star Destroyer Vehemence certainly 
appeared to have-as one Rebel crewer put it-all 
the guns in the universe behind it). 

A lone Y-wing limped along the periphery of 
the battle, her pilot a veteran of many such 
engagements. "Flight Leader Wilkins, beginning 
my run," he intoned calmly. Keying his comlink 
for a quick message to his astromech, he called 
out, "Better hang on back there, buddy." 

BXET-R2 (or "Box" as his master was fond of 
calling him), checked the restraining straps and 
clamps that held him in place behind the cockpit 
of the Y-wing. The R2-unit emitted a mournful 
beep and Wilkins chuckled as he read the 
translation on his computer system: "Try not to 
crash this time." 

The Y-wing sped through the carnage, as 
Wilkins cautiously, carefully placed the aiming 
reticle of his missile launchers squarely on the 
Vehemence. The fighter sped forward, crossing 
the kilometers to the Star Destroyer rapidly, as the 
targeting computer sought for a lock on the 
Vehemence's bridge. 

Just as the targeting computer signalled a posi- 
tive lock, Wilkins triggered his firing controls 
while his backseat gunner blazed away at the Star 
Destroyer's shields with the Y-wing's ion cannons. 
A brilliant spray of light and fire illuminated the 
area, blinding the pilot. 

Too late, Box howled a warning to the blinded 
pilot as a TIE bomber-damaged in the explosions- 
careened into the Y-wing's path, striking the for- 
ward shields and sending the pair of fighters spin- 
ning wildly out of control. 


Cynabar's Fantastic Technology: Droids is 
intended to help players and gamemasters more- 
easily integrate droids into an ongoing Star Wars 
campaign. The information in this volume can be 
used to design droids for use as both gamemaster 
characters and player characters. In addition, several 
scenario hooks are presented to help gamemasters 
develop droid 


Box ran diagnostics on the ship and reported 
both blaster cannons on the nose of the Y-wing 
had been sheared completely off. The cockpit still 
had a breathable atmosphere but structural damage 
to the nose was considerable. 

Box patched into the ship's internal sensors and 
found that Master Wilkins was still breathing and 
did indeed have a pulse. Still he failed to answer 
over the comm. The droid peered into the cockpit 
and saw that Wilkins and his ion gunner were 
slumped over in their seats. 

Taking control of the drive system, Box cor- 
rected the Y-wing's wild spin, halting the craft 
smoothly. Checking the navigational sensors, the 
droid noticed the TIE bomber had also regained 
control and was limping towards the damaged Y- 
wing, positioning itself for the inevitable kill shot. 

The droid began carefully modulating the grav- 
ity within the cockpit in an attempt to jostle the 
pilot awake. At the same time, Box plugged into 
the auxiliary control port with one of his many 
appendages and lurched the Y-wing forward and 
up into an arch that brought her out and away from 
the bomber's current vector. 

The bomber-badly damaged itself-sped past 
without acquiring a target lock and was sluggishly 
repositioning for another shot. BXET-R2 tied into 
the Y-wing's fire control system and armed the 
proton torpedo launcher. Sending the ship into as 
steep a dive as possible he inverted the ship and 
triggered off a wild shot, sending the blue-white 
projectile hurtling at the Imperial fighter. 

The Imperial pilot frantically avoided the mis- 
sile, once again losing control of his damaged ve- 
hicle. A moment later, Box activated the Y-wing's 
hyperdrive and the stubby fighter leapt into hyper- 
space and away from the battle.... 


themed adventures. A new method for constructing 
droids is also presented, allowing gamemasters and 
players to build these fascinating machines. Finally, a 
detailed selection of dozens of droid types-some new, 
some familiar-are compiled in the Droid Datalog. 
These droids can be used as the basis for droid player 
character templates are can be used as "stock" droids 
during a roleplaying session. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


THE 


DEFINING DROIDS 


"Droid: A mechanical and/or electronic construct 
designed and put into service to assist organic life." 


--From the Cybot Galactica Design Team Operations 
Manual 


While the above definition is substantially correct, 
it does not fully describe what exactly a droid is. A 
droid is more than a computer that can move under its 
own power. Often a droid is designed with a personal- 
ity as complex as that of an organic life form, or with 
the ability to perform tasks that are too physically de- 
manding for living beings. 


litustration by Joey Robinson 


Most droids are programmed with an advanced 
synthetic intelligence, separating them from their 
pure-ly robotic cousins (non-intellect bearing mecha- 
nisms, such as factory assembly robots common on 
many low-tech worlds). Not all droids have the same 
complexity of programming, and there is vast 
diversity in droid functions, designs and capabilities. 

A majority of droids have the common traits of 
selfaware intelligence, locomotion, sensory 
reception, logic, manipulation and communication, 
based on the 
requirements of the manufacturer. 

Droids are classified into five degrees, as follows: 


t 
Ab 
kS 


NA a | 
on 


ve 


° First Degree Droids. Usually utilitarian in disposi- 
tion, droids of this class are programmed with the 
physical sciences, medical sciences, or mathematics 
in mind. First degree droids are usually teamed up 
with organic counterparts to facilitate the completion 
of any specific task. The 2-1 B surgical droid is an 
example of a first degree droid. 

e Second Degree Droids. This type of droid is fre- 
quently designed for functionality over aesthetics. A 
second degree unit's ability is often overlooked by the 
uninformed, simply because of the droid's physical 
appearance. The lack of advanced personality pro- 
gramming on many models adds to this common mis- 
conception. Second degree droids are programmed 
for environmental, engineering, and technical duties 
as well as applied sciences. Astromech droids--such 
as the famed R2-series--are second degree droids. 

¢ Third Degree Droids. The most common models to 
be seen with organic beings are third degree droids. 
They are designed and programmed with the social 
sciences in mind, specializing in protocol, translation, 
organic relations, teaching, diplomatic, and other 
functions that put them in regular contact with 
organics. As such, these droids tend to be physically 
designed in the mold of their makers, or the 
manufacturer's intended customer base. Protocol 
units like the 3PO and Siak-series are classified as 
third degree droids. 


e Fourth Degree Droids. Such units are illegal in 
most 


FANTASTIC_TECHNOLOGY 


Axejeg ay ul spioug e 8ug uaydeu9 


c 
5 
S 

E 

a 
© 

& 
ọ 
8 

8 

È 
c 

2 
= 
E 
a 
2 


systems. Fourth degree droids are designed for mili- 
tary and security operations. After several accidents 
involving the design and manufacture of these "me- 
chanical soldiers," the use of fourth degree droids was 
prohibited, except for certain models designed for 
legitimate military use. Although publicly denouncing 
the use of lethal droids for any operation, the Empire ( 
as well as several underworld organizations) use 
fourth degree droids in an assassin capacity. Defense 
droids, like the G-2RD, are fourth degree droids. 

e Fifth Degree Droids. Similar to primitive robotic 
units, fifth degree droids are typically programmed for 
menial duties such as simple lifting, mining, salvage, 
transportation, sanitation and waste control. Fifth de- 
gree droids generally perform tasks deemed unfit or 
impossible for organic life. This class of droid is sel- 
dom equipped with any advanced knowledge proces- 
sors, save for those that are required to perform an 
intended task. Fifth degree droids are the most com- 
mon (and most affordable) found throughout the gal- 
axy. The BLX-series labor unit is but one of the many 
fifth degree droids found throughout the galaxy. 


EXTRAPOLATED HISTORY 


--From the Cybot Galactica Design Team Operations 
Manual 

The true origin of droid technology is unknown. 
What is known is that droid technology predates 
space 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


Chapter One ¢ Droids in the Galaxy 


Het 


: SA 
ELLO 


¥ 
Gs: 


flight. Droids "evolved" from ancient robotics 
technology (coupled with the addition of primitive 
artificial intelligence). Rudimentary skills could be 
programmed into one of these machines, and the 
programming would "learn" and enhance itself to fit 
specific tasks. 

As electronics and software compression technol- 
ogy improved, programming a droid with multiple 
skills became standard practice. Droid technology 
expanded and units were seen in systems across the 
Old Republic. 

Resentment directed at these units appeared al- 
most immediately. It was widely felt that the use of 
mechanical intelligence was the cause for massive job 
loss throughout much of the galaxy. This widespread 
feeling was not enough to hold technology back, how 
ever. Sales of droids among the affluent increased, 
and eventually, droid manufacturers began producing 
lessexpensive models for the commercial market. 

Once personal-use models became common, engi- 
neers began working on developing personality soft- 
ware to make interaction between droids and organics 
easier. The initial personality designs were primitive; 
add-on voice modules that mimicked organic speech, 
and patently fake synthetic skin were perhaps the 
earliest examples of "droid personality" extras avail- 
able to the commercial market. Later, intricate matri- 
ces were developed allowing a droid to simulate 
emotions. These matrices developed and learned on 
their own without assistance from a programmer. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOL! 


The advantage of a droid possessing a distinct per- 
sonality was obvious to those in the automata-manu- 
facturing industry: it was easier to sell an item that 
could assist in selling itself. Many beings found 
owning something that possessed what could be 
loosely termed as "artificial sentience" a novelty. ( 
Early droid manufacturers borrowed heavily from the 


home pet in-dustry'’s marketing campaigns, 
encouraging consumers to bring a droid "into the 
family.") 


One disadvantage concerning droid personalities 
became apparent very quickly: some units--particu- 
larly poorly treated or badly maintained droids--de- 
veloped "anti-social" personalities. Such units were 
often recalcitrant, performing as ordered but without 
any distinction. Droids of this kind were either taken 
back to the manufacturer under warranty, or 
destroyed by angry owners. 

Today, droids fill an unspoken niche in society, 
performing their daily tasks as ordered. Some notable 
droids have broken the barrier that forces them into a 
existence of servitude, proving their worth by acting 
out on their own (though usually within strict 
program parameters). 

Organic resentment of droid-kind remains deep- 
seated and has not altered a great deal since the days 
of the Old Republic. Many beings continue to see 
mechanical intelligence as a threat. Mechanicals are 
often deprived of entrance into business and leisure 
establishments (save for, units that are required for 
their owner's health or assistance). 


OGY 
Tra 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOG 


DROIDS AND THE LAW 


THE PAST 


While most mechanicals are content to go about 
their daily tasks without complaint--at least without 
serious complaint--there have been a number of in- 
stances when a droid has gone beyond its program- 
ming and committed acts that are illegal. These events 
have occurred often enough throughout history to 
prompt many governments (including the Old Repub- 
lic) to compose a set of governing laws regarding 
droid ownership and the responsibilities therein. 

These laws were originally placed into effect prima- 
rily as a safeguard against rogue droids and the 
organic beings who owned them (notably crime lords 
and pirates). If a droid committed an illegal act by way 
of a command from its master, the owner would 
simply be brought to trial as if he performed the act 
himself. Early laws in many systems stated that the 
droid was simply a tool with which the criminal act 
was performed. 

Correspondingly, if a droid committed a minor 
crime of its own volition (such as illegally parking or 
maneuvering a conveyance, petty theft or other such 
misdemeanor), the owner would be ticketed and 
fined. The courts would admonish the owner to repair 
whatever malfunction the droid had, and that would 
typically be the end of the matter. In extreme cases ( 
destruction of private property, assault, or capital 
crimes), the droid would be confiscated and 
destroyed. 

Many governments employed highly trained engi- 
neers and slicers who could perform the necessary 
investigations as to the cause of a "rogue" droid's 
actions. These beings could readily discover faulty 
programming, internal hardware glitches, or--by care- 
fully examining the droid's memory--a criminal com- 
mand given by the owner. Trials would then be held 
as would any other "normal" criminal trial. Droids 
whose owners had been convicted of a crime would be 
memory-wiped and reprogrammed to factory settings 
and auctioned off to a new owner, the profits from 
such an auction used to defray the expense of the trial. 


IMPERIAL RULE 
The rise of the Empire did little to alter the basis 
for what has become known as the "Droid Statutes." 
Hidden within the Imperial Penal References 
compiled by COMPNOR, there is a sub-section 
detailing infractions as they are related to mechanical 
beings. 


CLASS ONE INFRACTIONS 


The illegalities listed as Class One are considered 
to be capital offenses. Considering the basic prejudice 
against droids in the first place (coupled with their 
typically subservient role in galactic society), Class 
One infractions are often kept quiet by Imperial forces 


to quell any widespread panic that could arise from a 
droid committing such a horrendous offense. 

Punishment for a Class One infraction by 
COMPNOR standards requires the droid's owner to 
be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to life, 
and also mandates the droid's destruction. 

Class One infractions include, but are not limited 
to, the following crimes: 


e Conspiring to overthrow the Empire. 


e Voluntary manslaughter. 

e Programming or actions with intent on harming 
Imperial personnel. 

e Programming a droid to engage in espionage activi- 
ties against the Empire or its citizens. 


CLASS TWO INFRACTIONS 


While still severe crimes, Class Two infractions are 
less serious than Class One violations. Class Two 
crimes are common only to larger cities and space- 
ports and due to the nature of these acts, trials regard- 
ing Class Two infractions are often highly publicized. 

Class Two infractions include, but are not limited 
to, the following crimes: 


¢ Involuntary manslaughter. 

e Ownership or installation of an illegal weapon 
within a droid's chassis. 

* Illegal programming (SkillWare with an availability 
rating of "X"). 

e Unauthorized espionage programming. 

Punishment for a Class Two infraction includes 
confiscation of the droid, as well as imprisonment for 
five to thirty standard years for the owner (typically in 
a high-security facility, such as Kessel). In some ex- 
treme cases, the droid is destroyed; however, stan- 
dard practice is to memory wipe and reset the unit's 
programming and place it in a public auction. 


CLASS THREE INFRACTIONS 


Class Three infractions are often overlooked by 
Imperial personnel, which delegates responsibility for 
policing such crimes to local authorities. Punishment 
for a Class Three infraction usually includes a heavy 
fine for the owner (from 1,000 to 5,000 credits), and a 
mandatory memory wipe and reset for the droid. In 
some cases the owner has been found criminal and 
the droid has been impounded for public auction. 

Class Three infractions include, but are not limited 
to, the following crimes: 

e Theft in amounts exceeding 10,000 credits standard. 
e Ownership or installation of a weapon without a 
permit. 


e Physical assault not concluding with death. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLO 


CLASS FOUR INFRACTIONS 


Class four infractions are normally the 
most common droid-related crimes. Such 
violations are sometimes overlooked in 
larger cities and spaceports, though in a 
more rural area they are typically enforced 
very strictly. 

Punishment for a Class Four infraction 
includes a modest fine for the owner, from 
500 to 3,000 credits standard, and a 
memory wipe for the droid in question. 

Class Four infractions include, but are 
not limited to, the following crimes: 
¢ Theft in amounts between 5,000 and 10, 
000 credits. 

e Possession or installation of restricted 
programming without a permit. 

e Property damage (includes other droids). 

e Trespassing on droid-restricted property. 


CLASS FIVE INFRACTIONS 


The Class Five infractions are the lowest 
misdemeanor on COMPNOR's list of " 
Droid Statutes." The simplest of crimes 
often go unnoticed by many law 
enforcement officials everywhere. 

Punishment for a Class Five infraction 
usually results in a small fine for the owner 
(100 to 1,000 credits) and a memory wipe 
for the offending droid. 

Class Five infractions include, but are 
not limited to, the following crimes: 
¢ Theft in amounts up to 5,000 credits stan- 
dard. 

e Verbal assault on an organic being. 
e Lack of a restraining bolt or other "leash- 
ing" technology. 


ENFORCEMENT OF DROID 
STATUTES 


Though these infractions are the basis of 
the so-called "Droid Statutes," enforcement 
varies widely throughout the galaxy. Some 
technologically-advanced worlds--like Cor- 
uscant or Derilyn--will lighten the pun- 
ishments for some of the "lesser" crimes as 
the attention of law enforcement personnel 
is needed elsewhere. In more-remote areas- 
-such as Tatooine or Gamorr--any injustice 
performed by a droid typically wreaks 
havoc on the local judicial system for 
months on end. 


G 


Tiy 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


OVERRIDING LIFE PRESERVATION PROGRAMMING 


In the Star Wars universe, droids (with the 
exception of some fourth degree models) are 
required by Imperial law to be equipped with life 
preservation programming (LPP). 

LPP subroutines prevent a droid from experi- 
encing the compulsion to do harm to an organic 
being. The fact that these programming measures 
are installed is not necessarily a complete safe- 
guard against rogue droids, but due to the sophis- 
tication of programming technology, the 
likelihood of a droid going rogue is lessened a 
great deal. 

Even fourth degree droids, who are by their 
nature aggressive, are given LPP routines defining 
when action against organic life may be taken. 
Still, there are those who would attempt to 
override the LPP, allowing a droid to participate 
in combat. This is not a simple task by any means. 

However, the Imperial law enforcement appara- 
tus does not expend a great deal of effort 
enforcing this statute in the outlying regions of the 
Empire; such matters are usually delegated to 
local droid enforcement officers. 

In game terms, if a character wishes to override 
a droid's life preservation programming, she must 
make two successful skill rolls, a droid program- 
ming roll and a command roll. The droid 
programming roll is based on the degree of the 
droid, while the command roll is an opposed roll 
versus the droid's willpower skill or Knowledge 
attribute (whichever is higher). 


Many planetary militias have even gone so far as to 
create special branches of law enforcement officers 
that specialize in droid-related crimes. These groups 
are not unlike the technicians and slicers employed 
by the Old Republic; these officers investigate and 
prosecute crimes that violate the Droid Statutes. 

Typical droid enforcement agent. Dexterity 3D, 
blaster 3D+ 1, blaster: DEMP gun 5D, dodge 4D, 
Perception 2D+2, search 3D+2, Knowledge 3D+1, 
Strength 3D, Mechanical 2D, repulsorlift operation 
3D, Technical 4D, droid programming 5D+ 1, droid 
repair 5D, demolitions 
4D, security 4D+2. Move: 10. Blaster pistol (4D), 
DEMP carbine (3D ionization damage, 3-25/60/250, 
ammo: 10). 


THE DROID'S RIGHTS 
MOVEMENT 


Because of the mechanical semblance of sentience 
that many droids possess, a number of "Droid's 
Rights" factions have popped up across the galaxy. 
Most of these organizations are harmless, sending 
petitions to 


Gamemasters may decide for themselves if the 
two rolls should be made in the same round (caus- 
ing a multiple skill use penalty of -1D), or if the 
character may take two rounds to perform the 
action. 


DROID PROGRAMMING OVER 


RIDE DIFFICULTIES 


First Degree Very Difficult 
Second Degree Difficult 
Third Degree Heroic 
Fourth Degree Moderate 
Fifth Degree Difficult 


Note that not all droids have LPP subroutines. 
While the Empire mandates this programming be 
installed in all civilian droids, it does not enforce 
this law outside of the Core Worlds. In the some- 
what lawless Outer Rim Territories, for example, 
many outlaw techs and droid slicers have overrid- 
den this programming; characters should be made 
aware that it is possible that any droid they 
encounter could have had its LPP protocols 
erased. 

Anyone attempting to determine if a droid has 
had its LPP subroutine overridden must make a 
successful droid programming roll_ using the 
difficulties listed above. The attempt takes 1D 
minutes. 


government officials, marching in protest at droid 
auctions, and generally behaving in a well meaning (if 
annoying) manner. There are, however, some groups 
which have used violence in their struggle to " 
emancipate” droids. The droid-terrorist groups have 
popped up in some of the more-remote systems of the 
Empire, engaging in a variety of crimes. Some groups 
are harmless, committing only petty crimes (such as 
reprogramming a citizen's droid to recite terrorist 
slogans). Others are more aggressive, bombing droid 
manufacturing facilities and committing any number 
of Class One crimes to further their cause. 


THE COALITION OF AUTOMATON RIGHTS 
ACTIVISTS 


The Coalition of Automaton Rights Activists has 
been around and active for several decades. The Coa- 
lition is comprised of several factions ("Grease Lov- 
ers,” as their opponents prefer to call them). The 
Coalition's leadership is made up of individuals who, 
for the most part, share a common ideal: that all 
droids should be accorded the same respect and 
consider- 


ation that is shown to any sentient species of organic 
origins. 

That is not to say that all members of the Coalition 
share the same ideas about how to express this ideal. 
One of the more radical organizations--"Olgreen Intel- 
ligence Guild" led by Wilam Olgreen--have gone as 
far as erecting portable energy shields around droid 
reclamation plants (preventing cargo vessels from 
making deliveries of rogue or damaged droids). 
Other leaders--like Bethelia Halvala of "The 
Symatrum League"--have picketed outside major 
manufacturing facilities. 


THE MECHANICAL LIBERATION 
FRONT 


The most dangerous of the droid's rights groups is 
the MLF. Led by Jarred Sneel, the MLF has plagued 
many companies over the past three decades. Using 
hit-and-run tactics, these skilled mercenaries and 
engineers have managed to inflict severe damage on 
the plants of Industrial Automaton, Sienar 
Intelligence Systems, and MerenData, to name just a 
few. 

The MLF typically enters a manufacturing plant 
covertly, planting detonite bombs in strategic loca- 
tions. The resulting explosions cause chaos and halt 
all production for an indeterminate amount of time. 
This tactic is effective, though not for releasing droids 
from their "oppressive" captors. Much to Sneel's 
dismay, the NewsNets mark this group as being 
violently opposed to droids, rather than being a group 
dedicated to the freedom movement. Currently, there 
is a team of Espos moving secretly against the MLF, 
and it is believed that this Espo squad illegally 
operates within the Empire as well as the Corporate 
Sector. The CSA denies this allegation. 

The MLF has many members and they are con- 
nected by a large network of agents. Thus far they 
have been able to avoid major losses at every military 
confrontation they have been faced with. The Corpo- 
rate Sector Authority, as well as the Empire, have 
posted large rewards for information leading to the 
arrest and conviction of the MLF's leaders. 


JARRED SNEEL 


Type: Terrorist leader 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 Blaster 4D, dodge 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 Tactics 4D+2, willpower 5D 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 3D+2, starship gunnery 3D 
PERCEPTION 4D 

Command 7D, con 5D+1, hide 6D+2, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D+1 

Droid programming 5D, droid repair 5D+1, demolitions 
4D+2, security 3D+2 

Capsule: Jarred Sneel's background is something of a 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


mystery; there are literally dozens of stories about his 
past, all of them wildly contradictory. What is known is 
that Sneel is a male human in his mid 30s, a native of 
the Corellian system. He is obsessed with droids, 
mouthing slogans about how "organics must rise up and 
free droids from their cruel servitude." Whether or not 

Sneel truly believes in his cause is unknown; the current 

CorSec file on the MLF indicates that it may be a front 

for a Black Sun operation. 

Typical MLF Soldier. Dexterity 3D, blaster4D, 
dodge 3D+2, Knowledge 2D, Mechanical 2D, 
Perception 3D, search 4D, hide 3D+2, Strength 2D, 
Technical 3D, droid programming 4D, droid repair 
5D+ 1, demolitions 3D+2. Move: 10. Blaster pistol ( 
4D), detonite explosive (6D damage, blast radius of 
10 meters). 


SCENARIO HOOK 


The MLF's leader, Jarred Sneel, launches a 
series of bombing attacks on droid plants in an 
Outer Rim system; unfortunately, one of the 
droid plants is the site of a Rebel espionage 
operation. (Several key Rebels are hardwiring 
espionage routines in droids on the assembly 
line.) 

The player characters are sent by the Alliance 
to infiltrate the MLF and stop Sneel's bombing 
campaign before it damages any other Rebel 
interests in the sector. 

As an alternative, the characters could be local 
droid enforcement agents (or CorSec officers, or 
Sector Rangers), sent to prevent any further 
bombings and end the MLF's activities. During 
the investigation, the characters stumble into the 
true motives of the MLF's leader: a Black Sun- 
controlled company is supplying the construc- 
tion equipment to rebuild droid plants destroyed 
in the bombings. The characters must apprehend 
Sneel and prove Black Sun's involvement. 


THE REBEL ALLIANCE 


Though not considered a true "Droid's Rights" 
group by definition, the Rebel Alliance has put forth a 
policy of tolerance, for all forms of life (in response to 
Palpatine's campaign of intolerance directed at non- 
human species); it would appear that the Alliance's 
treatment of mechanicals is an extension of this toler- 
ance. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


SCENARIO HOOK 


The player's characters are told by their Alliance 
commanders to pick up and protect a new "recruit, 
" who is defecting from the Empire. This recruit is 
actually a servant droid that was owned by an 
Imperial officer. The droid, either as a result of 
espionage programming or a faulty memory wipe, 
has managed to escape Imperial service and wants 
to deliver information to the Rebellion. 

Upon reaching the rendezvous point, the charac- 
ters attempt to find their "pickup," most likely 
looking for an organic, rather than a droid. The 
droid will try to approach them, but it is being 


DROID MANUFACTURING 
COMPANIES 


There are several droid manufacturers in the gal- 
axy; some are major corporations with sector-span- 
ning distribution and retail networks, while others are 
craftsmen and artisans that individually construct 
droids to order. The following are brief descriptions 
of some of the key droid producers, and where their 
products may be found: 


ACCUTRONICS 


A former subsidiary of Industrial Automaton, 
Accutronics pioneered the marketing of droids to 
families, typically in a servant or nanny role. While 
not a major success, Accutronics has raised a few 
eyebrows among rival corporations; the MK 8001 
that Accutronics has introduced is becoming one of 
the fastest selling droids in the Outer Rim Territories. 
Accutronics can be found on many planets in the 
Outer Rim that possess an Imperial class spaceport. 


‘TRONICS 


ARAKYD 


One of the principal suppliers of military droids to 
the Empire, Arakyd has made a name for itself with 
the Viper probe droid. Arakyd has only recently 
begun to sell droids to the commercial market, 
preferring to handle the needs of larger groups such 
as the Imperial Navy or the Sector Rangers. Arakyd 
droids can be found throughout the Core Worlds, but 
typically require military certification or extremely 
detailed waivers for purchase. 


hunted by Imperials and does not wish to get caught. 
A variation on this theme involves the Imperial 
officer: perhaps he wishes to defect, and has sent 
the droid-laden with military secrets-to the Rebel 
Alliance to prove his desire to defect is genuine. 
However, Imperial Intelligence has suspicions 
about the officer and plans to use the droid to track 
the Rebels back to their base, as well as exposing 
the defection. The characters must find the droid, 
retrieve the data, verify its authenticity, and 
arrange for the Imperial's defection ... without 
tipping the Alliance's hand to the Empire's spies. 


A R A Y K D 


NUM] 


ARO 


Once a strong contender in the field of security 
droids, Aro was wiped out by bad publicity; one of 
Aro's droids was used in an assassination attempt in 
the Corellian system. Still, many of Aro's designs can 
be found in surplus auctions and on the Black 
Market. The company's founder (and chief designer), 
Lirran Aro, lives on Selonia (in the Corellian system). 


CALDRAHLSEN MECHANICALS 


Caldrahlsen Mechanicals was one of the first manu- 
facturers of automata specializing in legal matters. 
These droids, while initially greeted with skepticism, 
have become commonplace in the Imperial legal sys- 
tem. Caldrahlsen Mechanicals' main offices and 
manufacturing plants are located on Esseles (Darpa 
sector, in the Core Worlds; for more information on 
Esseles, see pages 221-224 of The Official Star Wars 
Adventure Journal, issue seven). 


CAORANN 


CYBOT GALACTICA 


Cybot Galactica is one of the foremost droid manu- 
facturers in the galaxy, famous for its 3PO line of 
protocol droids. Not surprisingly, CG is one of the 
major forces in the Corporate Sector as well as an 
impressively successful company in the Core Worlds. 
Cybot Galactica service centers and droid markets can 
be found in every standard (or better) class spaceport. 


CYBOT GALACTICA 


GEENTECH 


Geentech, a small medisensor company, was one of 
the first manufacturers to produce a surgical droid 
that was widely successful. Unfortunately, Geentech 
was run out of business in a cutthroat series of legal 
battles with the larger Genetech corporation (which 
claimed Geentech's name infringed on several 
Genetech copyrights). It is widely rumored that 
Genetech won the legal battles after offering the 
Empire deep discounts and other trade inducements 
in exchange for a satisfactory verdict, though these 
allegations have never been substantiated. 


SGENETECH 


GENETECH 


One of the largest droid manufacturers, Genetech 
was originally a pharmaceutical firm. When droid use 


FANTASTIC TEC OLOGY 


first became widespread, Genetech executives pur- 
chased a small manufacturing facility and automated 
a significant portion of their operations, hugely 
increasing corporate profits by trimming employee 
overhead; Genetech's droid program was perhaps one 
of the most hotly controversial business practices of 
its day and is likely one of the causes of anti-droid 
sentiment in the Old Republic. 

After a particularly virulent hive virus ran its 
course, Genetech stocks were at an all time low; the 
companies much vaunted anti-viral serum had failed 
miserably. However, some of the early Genetech 
profits had been funnelled into more small droid 
manufacturing plants. Within a few years-and several 
lucrative legal battles--Genetech re-tooled and began 
producing droids for the medical market, and has been 
showing a huge profit ever since. Genetech droids can 
be found on most planets with a stellar class (or 
better) spaceport. 


GO-CORP/UTILITECH 


Go-Corp--a manufacturer of automated convey- 
ances--operates within the Corporate Sector and 
maintains service and manufacturing centers on all 
CSA planets with a stellar class (or better) spaceport. 
Go-Corp manufactures the actual conveyance (typi- 
cally landspeeders and airspeeders) while the subsid- 
lary company, Utilitech, manufactures the droids that 
control the conveyances. Go-Corp/Utilitech products 
are not distributed widely outside of the Corporate 
Sector, though they can occasionally be found on the 
more civilized planets of the Outer Rim Territories. 


Go-Corp OTe 


INDUSTRIAL AUTOMATON 


Known for high-precision droids, Industrial 
Automaton is one of the premier droid manufacturers 
in the galaxy (as evidenced by the highly successful 
R-series astromechs). IA droids can be purchased on 
any planet with a standard (or better) class spaceport. 
IA droids can often be purchased at a discount, since 
the company is constantly engaged in price wars with 
its chief competitor: Cybot Galactica. 


INDUSTRIAL 
AUTOMATON 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


KALIBAC INDUSTRIES 


Kalibac Industries-a small industrial automation 
firm-has never really found its niche in the galactic 
droid market. After a series of legal battles with Cybot 
Galactica, KI is substantially weakened. Kalibac 
droids are extremely good, however; in fact, many 
outlaw techs have stolen the designs of several 
Kalibac Industries' droids and produced cheap, faulty 
imitations. Kalibac Industries retains only two 
manufacturing and retail centers, one on Coruscant 
and one on Procopia (the capital of Tapani sector). 


KALIBAC 
INDUSTRIES 


LES TECH 


Les Tech is another relatively small company (cur- 
rently fighting a takeover attempt by Cybot Galactica) 
, Specializing in exploration droids. Several Les Tech 
designs have been adopted by the Imperial scouting 
services (though it appears the bulk of Les Tech's 
sales are actually to the Rebel Alliance). Les Tech 
maintains three manufacturing plants, one located on 
Coruscant, and the other two on Brentaal. Les Tech 
designs can be purchased or serviced at virtually all 
Imperial-class spaceports in the Core Worlds. 


LOVOLAN 


Lovolan specializes in high-end droid models, de- 
signed for service to the wealthy; Lovolan droids are 
made from high-quality materials and are often deco- 
rated with precious gems and valuable metals. 
Lovolan has a chain of retail and service centers 
throughout the Core Worlds, and such outlets can be 
found on any Core World with an Imperial-class 
spaceport. 


ovolan 


MEDTECH 


The manufacturer of the FX-series medical droid, 
Medtech established itself early on as a major con- 
tender in the field of surgical automata. The company 
has not lived up to its early promise, however; a series 
of cutbacks and management shakeups have virtually 
ended the production of new droid designs. Currently, 
MedTech is downsizing at a rapid rate and only main- 
tains offices and service centers on worlds in the 
Deep Core. 


pg MEDTECH 


MERENDATA 


MerenData--a contributing sponsor to the Corpo- 
rate Sector Authority--specializes in the manufacture 
of security systems, interrogation droids and target 
drones for the military. 


PUBLICTECHNIC 


A recent addition to the galactic droid market, 
Publictechnic deals primarily in large, maintenance- 
oriented units for sale to municipal and planetary 
governments. The main production plant for 
Publictechnic droids is on Sennatt (near the Bothan 
colony, Kothlis). The company's main service center 
and "droid shop” is also located on Sennatt. 


ERENDATA 


PNBLICTECTINIC 


RIM SECURITIES 


One of the more successful droid companies in the 
Outer Rim Territories, Rim Securities--based in 
Portmoak sector--manufactures security, defense and 
exploration units predominantly. The bulk of Rim Se- 
curities’ sales occur in its chain of "DroidMarts," a 
string of small service and retail outlets that are scat- 
tered throughout Quence, Parmel and Portmoak sec- 
tors. Small DroidMarts can be found in this region on 
any planet with a stellar class (or better) spaceport. 


SECURITIES 


ROCHE 


"Roche" is the nickname for the droid-manufactur- 
ing program instituted by the insectoid Verpine spe- 
cies; the Verpine refer to their droid-building effort as 
the "Roche Hive Mechanical Apparatus Design And 
Construction Activity For Those Who Need The 
Hive's Machines." (Verpine prefer to speak very 
specifically; most non-Verpine prefer to simplify the 
concept to "Roche.") 

The Verpine have long been recognized as excep- 
tional starshipwrights, and--due to their love of tech- 
nology--eventually branched out into droid manufac- 
turing. The early Roche designs were not well- 
received, but later droids are beginning to gain 
popularity. 

Roche designs may be purchased from the Verpine 
in the Roche system; many Verpine droids have also 
found a place in the marketplaces of Ithorian herd- 
ships. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
eee 


SERVO-DROID 


Serv-O-Droid specializes in the construction of la- 
bor automata, work droids and heavy equipment ( 
such as construction gantries). While it is no longer a 
viable company--its assets were liquidated and split 
among the charter members of the Corporate Sector 
Authority--many Serv-O-Droid units are still 
functioning. A "remainder house," dealing in 
reconditioned Serv-ODroid designs, has recently 
opened on Elshandruu Pica, and is experiencing a 
great deal of success. 


SERV 


DRŪID 


SIENAR INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS 


One of the fastest growing arms of the massive 
Santhe/Sienar corporation, Sienar Intelligence 
Systems is competing directly with MerenData and 
Arakyd for lucrative government contracts. SIS- 
manufactured droids can not be purchased except 
directly from the company, and only after a thorough 
background and credit check have been completed. 

One of the principal distribution centers of Sienar 
Intelligence Systems' products has recently been acti- 
vated on Corulag, an extension of Santhe/Sienar's re- 
search and development complex near Dammon Uni- 
versity. (For more information on Corulag, see The 
Official Star Wars Adventure Journal, issue seven, 
pages 214-215.) 

Military and law-enforcement personnel are typi- 
cally the only groups authorized to purchase Sienar 
droids (though it is believed that some nobles in the 
Core Worlds and in Tapani Sector have access to SIS 
hardware). 


IENA R 


Intelligence Systems 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


IVe 
` 
ORI iu 
w 5 


TELBRINTEL 


A specialist firm, TelBrinTel manufactures droids 
for purely scientific purposes (though these designs 
often end up in military service). Noted for their high 
quality workmanship and extreme accuracy, 
TelBrinTel science droids see use in many universities 
and military research installations. TelBrinTel 
maintains service centers, manufacturing plants and 
dealerships throughout the Core Worlds, and recently 
began marketing less-expensive models in the Tion 
Hegemony, the Centrality and the fringes of the 
Corporate Sector Authority (typically on worlds with a 
stellar--or better--class spaceport.) 


ULBAN ARMS 


A recent extension of LeisureMech Enterprises--a 
CSA company that's droid division specialized in 
highend luxury droids--Ulban Arms has had a great 
deal of success with the Class I Defense Droid. 
Despite the success of this model, Ulban Arms 
manufactures and sells exclusively within the CSA's 
borders; apparently the Class I's design was procured 
from within the Empire and any attempt to mass- 
produce and sell the droid outside of the Corporate 
Sector will likely provoke Imperial penalties. 
Currently, the Class I is the only droid-type 
manufactured by Ulban Arms, though a number of 
security and commercial droids are in development. 


VERIL LINE SYSTEMS 


Veril Line Systems specializes in industrial droids-- 
such as the EG-series power droid--and has had tre- 
mendous success. VLS' main offices are on Coruscant 
(where, incidentally, the IN-series information droid is 
widely used). VLS droids are available on any world 
with a stellar class spaceport. 


OTHER DROID MARKETS 


While there are literally millions of places to pur- 
chase "stock" droids--Galladinium's, Ithorian herd- 
ships, manufacturer's outlets, to name a few--some 
owner's may wish to have a droid upgraded beyond 
the manufacturer's specs ... and in some cases such 
upgrades are illegal. While not sanctioned by the Em- 
pire, there are a number of outlaw techs that 
specialize in droids and droid-related technology. The 
following are a small sampling of such droid 
technicians and where they may be found: 


KLIGSON'S MOON 


Kligson's Moon--also known as "Droid World"--is 
generally considered a myth, a tall tale shared by Outer 
Rim spacers. However, the story is more reality than 
myth: Kligson's Moon exists. 

The "moon" is actually an artificial construct, a 
hybrid of numerous starship hulls, drive engines, and 
space station decks, populated exclusively by droids. 
Kligson--who's body is almost completely made up of 
cybernetic replacement parts--refuses to allow any 
organic life aboard his station. 

Kligson's moon is mobile; after an encounter with 
Rebel agents shortly after the Battle of Yavin, Kligson 
moved his home and to date, no one has found its new 
location. 


KLIGSON'S MOON 


Type: Mobile space platform 

Scale: Capital 

Length: 800 meters 

Skill: 

Crew: 1,000 (droids), gunners: 20, skeleton 20/+15 
Crew Skill: Astrogation 9D, capital ship gunnery 7D, 
capital ship piloting 5D+2, capital ship shields (6D), 
sensors 7D 

Passengers: 2,000 

Cargo Capacity: 5,000 metric tons 

Consumables: 2 years 

Hyperdrive Multiplier. x4 

Hyperdrive Backup: x10 


Nav Computer. Yes 
Maneuverability: 1 D 
Space: 4 
Hull: 5D 
Shields: 2D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 40/1D 
Scan: 80/2D 
Search: 125/3D 
Focus: 5/3D+2 
Weapons: 
30 Turbolaser Batteries 
Fire Arc: 7 front, 8 left, 8 right, 7 back 
Crew: 2 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 3-15/35/75 
Atmosphere Range: 6-30/70/150 km 
Damage: 9D 
5 Tractor Beam Projectors 
Fire Arc: 1 front, 2 left, 2 right 
Crew: 3 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1-5/15/30 
Atmosphere Range: 1-5/15/30 km 
Damage: 4D 


Capsule: Kligson's Moon is the name of a unique mobile 
space platform, named for its creator. Kligson, a warrior who 
was wounded during a major battle (reputedly during the 
Clone Wars, though this has never been verified), built the 
station as a refuge from organic life; Kligson only allows 
droids aboard his station. 

Kligson's Moon was assembled from a variety of starship 
hulls, space station components, and capital ship engines. 
While appearing ungainly, the vehicle is in fact surprisingly 
strong, possessing substantial shielding and 


weaponry. 
KLIGSON 

Type: Cyborg recluse 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 6D, blaster artillery 5D, brawling parry 5D, dodge 5D, 

firearms 5D, melee combat 8D, melee parry 8D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 6D+2, intimidation 5D, languages 5D, planetary 

systems 5D, planetary systems: Outer Rim Territories 7D, 

streetwise 6D, survival 5D, tactics 7D, willpower 10D 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Archaic starship piloting 5D, astrogation 10D, capital ship 

gunnery 7D, capital ship piloting 4D, capital ship piloting: 

Kligson's Moon 10D, sensors 8D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 6D, command 6D, command: droids 11D, con 5D, 

persuasion 6D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 5D, climbing/jumping 4D, lifting 6D, stamina 

7D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Armor repair 8D, blaster repair 8D, capital starship repair 10D, 

capital starship weapon repair 10D, computer programming/ 

repair 9D, (A) droid engineering 9D, droid programming 8D, 

droid repair 8D 

Special Abilities: 

Cyborg body : Kligson's body is almost entirely made up of 

cybernetic parts; as such Kligson requires no food or water. In 

addition, Kligson receives +2D to Strength to resist physical 

damage and +1D versus energy damage. Internal Blaster: 

Kligson has blasters built into his cybernetic hands (damage 

5D, range 10 meters, 10 shots). 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


Character Points: 27 

Move: 10 

Capsule: After receiving grievous injuries during a battle 
many years ago, Kligson's damaged body was outfitted with a 
vast array of cybernetic parts. After witnessing the cruelty that 
living beings can inflict on each other firsthand, the 
disenchanted warrior vowed never to interact with organics 
again. After building a massive space platform out of spare 
parts, Kligson surrounded himself with droids (typically 
salvaged from spare-part bins) and hid himself away in an 
unexplored system. 

It is rumored that Kligson had a brief encounter with the 
Empire and the Rebellion, though the specifics of the 
encounter are not known; after the conflict, Kligson moved his 
"Droid World" from its home system and has not been seen 
since. 


SCENARIO HOOK 


The search for Kligson's new location can be 
the basis for a scout-style campaign; since 
Kligson knows his way around the Outer Rim 
Territories, he can be a tremendous source of 
information. 

In addition, Kligson is a highly gifted engineer 
and mechanic, capable of repairing or building a 
vast array of ship components and droids. Char- 
acters that need a piece of specialized equipment 


or a difficult droid modification may find 


Kligson’s assistance invaluable ... if he agrees to 
help them and if they can find him. 

Kligson will not deal with organics, nor will he 
choose a side in the war against the Empire. He 
may, however, agree to speak to a character that 
has cybernetic replacement limbs, though this 
will take a great deal of persuasion and charm on 
the part of the player characters. However, one of 
Droid World's strictest laws remains in effect: 
anything Kligson repairs, he keeps. 


OMZE'S INCREDIBLE TRAVELLING 
STARPORT 


Omze's Incredible Travelling Starport is a rather 
unique space vehicle that jumps-some say randomly- 
from system to system in the Outer Rim Territories. 
Run by a sly Sludir, Omze's is a veritable market- 
place of hard-to-find services and goods. (For more 
information on Omze's Incredible Travelling 
Starport, see Platt's Starport Guide, pages 80-96.) 

Individuals looking for illegal or restricted droid 
modifications may find Omze's useful: Wilam 
Olgreen (a droids' rights activist and formerly a 
design specialist for Industrial Automaton) tends to 
hawk his dubious wares there. 


FANTASTIC ICHNOS 


WILAM OLGREEN 
Type: Outlaw droid 
tech DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 4D, dodge 5D, melee parry 5D, pick pocket 6D, 
running 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 6D, business 5D, languages 5D, streetwise 6D, 
value 6D, willpower 6D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Astrogation 4D, space transports 5D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 5D, con 7D, forgery 6D, sneak 6D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 5D 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Demolitions 4D+2, (A) droid engineering 8D, droid 
programming 7D, droid repair 7D 
Character Points: 8 
Move: 
Equipment: 


Capsule: Wilam Olgreen, a prominent droid's rights activist, 
has long maintained an illicit droid modification business in 
the Outer Rim. Reasoning that the best way to help droids is to 
make them better (adding skills and hardware to a stock 
design) so that they can more readily prove their worth to 
organic masters. 

The Empire, on the other hand, has taken a dim view to 
Olgreen's activities, however; several of the "improvements" 
Olgreen has made on various droids include the addition of 
restricted SkillWare and weapons. Still, if someone has the 
cash--and is willing to pay his rather steep fees--Olgreen will 
come out of hiding to ply his trade. 


STARFORGE STATION 


StarForge Station--hidden deep in the heart of Ado 
sector's StarForge nebula--is a large outpost built on 
one of the many planetoids in the region. A haven for 
pirates and smugglers, StarForge Station is a nexus 
for 
illicit repair and modification operations; while the 
techs at StarForge tend to specialize in the modifica- 
tion of space vessels, there are several droid engineers 
who ply their trade aboard the station. 

Finding StarForge Station is no easy feat; since it is 
located in a turbulent nebula, sensor readings are--at 
best--sketchy. Since it is also a target of the Empire, 
the station's owner (a Duros named Chidee Na Maak) 
moves StarForge with great frequency. The best way 
to find the station is to maintain contact with pirates 
and smugglers, who will reveal the information to 
those they trust. (For more information on StarForge 
station, see pages 109-113 of Pirates and Privateers.) 


STARFORGE STATION 


Type: Asteroid 

Temperature: Temperate 
Atmosphere: Type I ( 

breathable) Hydrosphere: 
Moderate Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Artificial 

Length of Day: 20 Standard hours 
Length of Year: 300 Standard days 
Sentient Species: Varies widely 
Starport: Standard 

Population: 10,000 (approximately) 


SCENARIO HOOK 


The characters arrive at Omze's--possibly to 
trade, possibly to avoid some Imperial "entangle- 
ments"--and encounter an elite undercover squad 
of Espos, security troops from the Corporate 
Sector Authority. 

These Espos are on a covert mission to find 
and eliminate Jarred Sneel, leader of the 
Mechanical Liberation Front. Unfortunately, they 
can't find the elusive terrorist and have resorted 
to finding other droid rights activists and pressur- 
ing them in hopes of learning Sneel's where- 
abouts. Their current target is Wilam Olgreen, 
who is hiding at Omze's. 

As the characters move about the spaceport, 
Olgreen approaches them, offering them a great 
deal of money if they will transport him to 
StarForge Station. If they agree, the characters 
must sneak Olgreen past the Espo thugs and 
escape from the starport (fully realizing that 
shooting up Omze's place of business will likely 
anger the Sludir merchant a great deal). 

If they don't agree to help Olgreen, he turns up 
dead, with evidence implicating the characters in 
the murder; the Espos framed them simply be- 
cause they were the newest arrivals and were 
seen talking to the deceased outlaw droid tech. 
The characters must clear their names and ex- 
pose the Espo operation or face justice at Omze's 
hands. 


Planet Function: Shadowport 

Government: Tenant council 

Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: Free market, ships services, starships 
Major Imports: Raw and processed materials 


"SKOOT" JARIK 
Type: Droid slicer 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, blaster: DEMP gun 5D, dodge 4D+ 1, 
running 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+1 
Investigation 5D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Repulsorlift operation 3D+ 
1 PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Search 4D, sneak 3D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Computer programming/repair 5D+2, (A) droid engineering 
9D, droid programming 6D, droid repair 5D+1, security 5D 
Character Points: 6 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), DEMP gun (3D ionization 
damage, 3-25/60/250, ammo: 10), comlink, datapad, droid 
toolkit 


Capsule: After attending the CSA Institute of Technology, " 
Skoot" returned to his homeworld of Biewa and attempted to 
make a living as a droid technician. His career as a droid tech 
was an abject failure, however; most Biewans had 


little in the way of ready cash and spent their 
money on clothing, shelter and food, not droids. 

Jarik tried his hand as an information merchant, 
but on a backwater world like Biewa he lacked 
customers, the same problem he had as a droid 
tech. Eventually, Jarik met a smuggler who needed 
some illegal modifications 
made to his droid, modifications that the cash- 
strapped technician was only too happy to make. 
Before long, word of Skoot's ability spread 
throughout the Fringe and the young droid 
engineer soon had a thriving trade as an outlaw 
tech. 

Relocating to StarForge Station, Skoot is one of 
the only people aboard that works on droids. Skoot' 
s work is extremely reliable-which has made him a 
favorite among smugglers (at least those that own 
droids)-and typically justifies the high prices Jarik 
charges for his services. 


SCENARIO HOOK 


The characters arrive at StarForge Station, 
just in time for an Imperial raid. The initial patrol 
that shows up is small, and the station's denizens 
manage to fight them off, but more ships will 
likely follow. The only problem is that someone 
leaked the station's location to the Empire and 


the evidence implicates "Skoot" Jerik, the local 
droid tech (who just repaired a probe droid of 
some kind). 

Skoot offers to modify the character's droid ( 
or to build them one from scratch if necessary) if 
they will help clear his name and find the real 
traitor: a pirate that frequents the station. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


xeles əyz Ul spiouq e aug vaydeyy 


illustration by Joey Robinson 


FANTASTIC TECH 


DESIGNING, UPGRADING, 
CUSTOMIZING, AND 
MAINTAINING DROIDS 


Droids in the Star Wars universe can be built and 
modified the same as any vehicle or piece of equip- 
ment. In most cases however, the internal mechanics 
of a droid are so complicated that only the most 
learned and experienced of beings can adequately do 
the work required. 


DROID-RELATED SKILLS 


There are three primary skills a character can pos- 
sess with the express purpose of working on droids. 
These are droid programming, droid repair, and the 
advanced skill; (A) droid engineering, which is new 
to this volume. 


DROID PROGRAMMING 


Whenever a character wishes to modify a droid's 
basic programming, she must make a droid program- 
ming roll to accomplish her task. For more 
information on droid programming, refer to page 63 
of The Star Wars Roleplaying Game, Second Edition, 
Revised and Expanded. 


DROID REPAIR 


Characters use this skill to repair or modify droids. 
See below for more information on droid repair, as 
well as page 64 of The Star Wars Roleplaying Game, 
Second Edition, Revised and Expanded. 


(A) DROID ENGINEERING 


New to this volume is (A) droid engineering, an 
advanced skill. The (A) droid engineering skill 
encompasses the various facets of layout, design, and 
implementation of producing a droid from scratch. ( 
While it is possible for a character to construct a 
droid using the normal droid repair skill, the process 
is extremely difficult; hence the advantage to using ( 
A) droid engi- 
neering.) 


Skill, (A) droid engineering 


As an advanced 
requires double the amount of Character Points to 


advance, as well as a droid repair or droid 
programming die code of at least 5D. If a character 
has 5D in droid repair but not droid programming, 
that character may still purchase (A) droid 
engineering (however the bonus effects from the 
advanced skill will only apply to attempts that 
normally fall under the droid repair skill). The same 
is true of characters that possess droid programming 
and not droid repair, the advanced skill can be used 
in situations where droid programming skill rolls 
would also be allowed. 

If both prerequisite skills are at 5D or greater, (A) 
droid engineering can be used to both repair and pro- 
gram a droid. Refer to page 29 of The Star Wars 
Roleplaying Game, Second Edition, Revised and Ex 
panded for more information on advanced skills. 


DESIGNING A DROID: INITIAL 
THOUGHTS 


Owning a droid can be an interesting challenge for 
a character. The player has the ability to maintain, up- 
grade, and, with the gamemaster's assistance, even 
create a droid. When a character wishes to build a 
droid, the first thing that must be decided upon is the 


NOTE TO GAMEMASTERS 


It should be stressed that the following mate- 
rial presents optional rules for designing and 
improving droid characters. If you feel the book- 
keeping involved takes away from the flavor of 
your game, modify the rules to suit your cam- 


paign. 

These rules can be used to expand the droid 
player character creation process as established 
in the The Star Wars Roleplaying Game; Revised 
and Expanded, the Gamemaster Handbook, and 
revisited in this volume. 


intended function of the droid. What is the droid's 
primary purpose, and what will it be used for? 
Remember that droids are always created with a 
specific purpose in mind, and the skills and 
components that the unit possesses should reflect that 
purpose. 

Other things to keep in mind are the droid's appear- 
ance, how it interacts with other characters, and 
where the droid will see service. Does the droid 
appear humanoid? Will it work in a human- 
compatible surroundings or will it see service in zero- 
gravity or other such harsh environment? Is the droid 
a player character? Or will the droid be the tool of 
various characters? By answering questions like this-- 
subject to gamemaster approval--the new droid will be 
more interesting in the course of the roleplaying 
campaign. 

TIME TAKEN 

Much of the information in this chapter will refer 
the reader to a difficulty number. Except where noted, 
these skill checks will require a certain amount of 
time to complete as well. In addition, certain 
modifications require more time than others: 
SkillWare (the programming a droid carries) is easier 
to modify than TraitWare (the actual physical 
components that make up a droid). Use the following 
chart to determine the length of time any particular 


INSTALLATION TIME 
SkillWare 
1 hour 

2 hours 

5 hours 
24 hours 
72 hours 
1 week 


Difficulty 
Very Easy 
Easy 


TraitWare 
2 hours 

12 hours 
24 hours 
72 hours 

1 week 

2 weeks 


Moderate 
Difficult 
Very Difficult 
Heroic 


Gamemaster Note: The above estimates are fairly 
general; if a character rolls particularly well (or very 
badly), vary the Time Taken as appropriate. 


THE DROID CHASSIS 
TRAITWARE 


After deciding upon the droid's intended function, it 
must be fit into one of the primary five degrees. (For 
example, a protocol unit would use a third degree 
chassis, an astromech droid would use a second de- 
gree chassis, and so on.) 

Once the droid's degree has been determined, the 
engineer must purchase TraitWare for the droid; this 
is called "outfitting the chassis." Trait Ware purchased 
in this fashion (the creation of a new droid type) is 
considered to be "hardwired" into the droid, and is the 


FANTASTIC Eclat tl 


NOTE TO GAMEMASTERS 


The process of selecting a droid chassis and 
purchasing SkillWare and TraitWare is a fairly " 
quick and dirty" system. The prices on the ac- 
companying SkillWare and TraitWare tables re- 
flect the cost of any programming modules as 
well as physical components of the droid. These 
are still general guidelines, however; if the 
gamemaster does not want the characters to 
construct the droid, it is possible that parts are 
not available, or are so scarce that the price of 
constructing the new unit is prohibitive. 


basic framework for all droids of this type. Note that 
TraitWare may be purchased either by full die, or by 
pips. Current technology limits any attribute to LOD ( 
though it is possible--not recommended, but pos- 
sible--that the droid character may have attributes 
with a die code of OD). 

Example: Jeff's character, Dug, wants to build 
an astromech unit similar to R2-D2. Dug wants 
his droid--PR6-3--to have the following attributes: 
Knowledge 2D, Mechanical 2D+I, and 
Technical 3D. (All other attributes will have 1D 
each.) 

Jeff cross-references the degree of his droid (in 
this case, a second degree droid), with the spe- 
cific attribute he is purchasing. (See page 22.) 

According to the TraitWare Cost Chart, 
edge dice cost 300 credits apiece. Since Jeff 
wants his droid to have 2D in Knowledge, he 
multiplies the 300 credits by 2 for a total of 600 
credits. 

Mechanical dice for a second degree droid 
cost 150 credits; Mechanical "pips" for such 
droids cost 50 credits apiece. Jeff wants PR6-3 to 
have Mechanical 2D+1 so he must multiply the 
base cost for Mechanical dice (150) by 2, for a 
total of 300 credits; the "+1" costs an additional 
50 credits, bringing the total for the droid's 
Mechanical die code to 350 credits. 

Technical dice for a second degree droid are 
also 150 credits apiece. Jeff want his droid to 
have a Technical die code of 3D; he multiplies 
the base cost of the die (150 credits) by the 
number of dice desired (3D) for a total of 450 
credits. 

Finally, Jeff wants his droid to have 1D in all 
other attributes. According to the chart, it costs 
300 credits for 1D in Dexterity, 300 credits for 
1D in Perception, and 350 credits for 1D in 
Strength. The total cost of these attributes is 950 
credits. 

The total cost for Jeff's droid design is fairly 
steep: 600 credits for Knowledge dice, 350 credits 
for Mechanical dice, 150 credits for Technical 
dice, and 950 credits for the remaining attributes, 
bringing PR6-3's total cost to 2,350 credits! 

Because Dug is purchasing this TraitWare for 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


DROID ; 


Attribute 


TRAITWARE COST CHART (PER DIE) 


Degree 


Second Third Fourth 


300 
300 


150 
300 
350 
150 


Dexterity 
Knowledge 


Mechanical 
Perception 
Strength 


Technical 


300 
150 


325 
200 
400 
325 


150 
350 


300 
250 
200 
400 


TRAITWARE COST CHART (PER PIP) 
Degree 

Third 

100 

50 

110 

65 


Attribute 
Dexterity 
Knowledge 


Second 
100 
100 

50 

100 
150 

50 


Mechanical 
Perception 
Strength 
Technical 


the creation of a completely new droid, Jeff does 

not have to roll to install it. 

Optional Rule: The above rules assume that the 
character is ordering a chassis from a manufacturer of 
some type. If the player and gamemaster agree, you 
may wish to follow the installation rules in " 
Upgrading TraitWare" to build a droid from scratch. 
Note that attributes are hardwired to a droid and the 
installation will take double the "normal" installation 
time. 


UPGRADING TRAITWARE 


Once a droid chassis has been created, the 
hardwired attributes are unchangeable. Through great 
difficulty an owner may choose to attempt to improve 
a droid's attributes by purchasing and installing 
additional TraitWare. TraitWare used in this manner 
is considered "soft installed" and is therefore subject 
to erasure during memory wipes. 

TraitWare is purchased on datacards that contain 
TraitWare information. Each card holds enough infor- 
mation to boost the droid's attribute by one pip, and is 
the same cost as purchasing an additional pip for 
chassis construction (as shown above). It is necessary 
to install the datacard using (A ) droid engineering. If 
a character attempts to install a TraitWare datacard 
with droid repair (rather than (A ) droid engineering) 
the difficulty for the attempt is increased by two 
levels. One (A) droid engineering roll must be made 
for each datacard the character is attempting to install 
onto the droid. 


Fourth 
50 
150 
100 
85 

65 
110 


When a character attempts to install information 
from a datacard, the information is erased from the 
card as it is transferred to the droid. Once installed, 
the datacard is useless and should be discarded. If the 
roll is successful, the pip is added to the attribute. If 
the roll fails, no pip is added and a new datacard must 
be purchased to attempt the installation process again. 
There have been rumors that some technicians have 
been able to copy the datacard's TraitWare to a com- 
puter before installation, insuring that the information 
will not be lost. However, many manufacturers have 
incredibly complex copy-protection measures for 
such datacards, so any would-be droid slicer should 
be exceedingly cautious about such attempts. 


OUTFITTING THE DROID 
CHASSIS 


SKILLWARE 


Once the chassis is designed, the character can 
now purchase and install SkillWare. These programs 
are readily available in most portions of the galaxy 
and (for the most part) are fairly easy to install. 
SkillWare allows a character--and in some cases the 
droid itself--to upgrade old systems and install new 
ones. (In game terms, this means that the droid's skill 
die codes are increased.) 

SkillWare may or may not require the added instal- 
lation of external hardware to fully utilize the 
program- 


FANTASTIC Tea 


TRAITWARE INSTALLATION DIFFICULTIES 


—___———_— Degree 
Attribute First Second Third Fourth 
Dexterity Heroic Heroic Very Difficult Moderate Difficult 
Knowledge Difficult Very Difficult Moderate Heroic Heroic 
Mechanical Very Difficult Moderate Difficult Very Difficult Very Difficult 
Perception Moderate Difficult Moderate Difficult Moderate 
Strength Very Difficult’ Very Difficult Heroic Moderate Moderate 
Technical Moderate Moderate Very Difficult Very Difficult Very Difficult 
ming. For instance, if a program is installed which the aes ae or aN ne 
droid does not have the physical capacity for, only a k a i o. 3x 400 
those elements that can function without the hardware neu p , 
will come into pla Running a > 
E p oe says Thrown weapons 4,R 275 
xample: Jeni installs the languages skill into Vehicle blast 3R 250 
her R2 unit. Because the R2 unit does not have a ee peer i 
vocabulator, it may only understand many differ- 
ent languages, not speak them. Jeni solves this KNOWLEDGE SKILLWARE 
problem by adding Industrial Automaton's R- Skill Availability Cost(per D 
series Voice Box Adapter (Galladinium's Fantas- Te species bee E pe ) 
tic Technology, page. 27). Bureaucracy 1 100 
Use the SkillWare Catalog (found on pages 23-24) Business 1 75 
when purchasing skills for a droid. Find the degree of Cultures 2 200 
droid and cross-reference it with the base attribute on Intimidation 3 F 300 
the SkillWare Degree Multiplier Chart. Note that Languages T 75 
SkillWare is not available in pips, only by "D." The Law enforcement 2 250 
total cost of the SkillWare is the base cost from the Planetary systems 1 75 
SkillWare Catalog times the number found on the Streetwise 3 350 
multiplier chart. Survival 2 200 
At the time of creation, a droid chassis is able to Value 1 175 
accept 4D worth of SkillWare for a specific skill. Willpower 4 300 
Note: Current technology limits a droid's skills to a 
maximum of die code of 13D. 
MECHANICAL SKILLWARE 
Skill Availability Cost(per D) 
Archaic starship 4 250 
SKILLWARE CATALOG Bone 
DEXTERITY SKILLWARE a 3 aon 
Skill Availability Cost(per D) Capital ship 3,R 350 
: gunnery 
Archaic guns 4,R 300 Capital ship 2,F 150 
Blaster 3,R 225 piloting 
Blaster artillery 3, X 250 Capital ship 2 200 
Bowcaster 4,X 400 shields 
Bows 4, X 250 ät 2 75 
Brawling parry 2,F 200 Comniumicanons 
Dodge 1 150 
Firearms 4, X 300 
Grenade 4, X 250 
Lightsaber 4, X 550 
Melee combat 3, R 225 


FANTASTIC Uae n 


HRODS yet 


Ground vehicle 2 75 TECHNICAL SKILLWARE 
operation : Eoi 
Hover vehicle 2 100 Skill Availability Cost(per D) 
operation A rmor repair 3 175 
Powersuit operation 4 200 Blaster repair 2 150 
Repulsorlift operation 2 100 Capital ship repair 2 100 
Sensors 2 75 Capital ship 2,F 125 
S pace transports 2 150 weapon repair 
pall as piloting T a Computer 2 50 
arship gunnery ; ; ; 
Starship shields 2 F 200 A oe ee 3R 350 
A a T a Droid programming 2 75 
p Droid repair 2 125 
First aid 2,F 200 
Ground vehicle repair 2 100 
Hover vehicle repair 2 125 
PERCER TION SRICEWIARE (A) Medicine OF i 
Skill Availability Cost(per D) Repulsorlift repair 2 150 
Bargain 2 150 Security 3,F 250 
Command 3,F 300 Space transports repair 2 150 
Con 3,R 300 Starfighter repair 2 150 
Forgery 4,X 300 Starship weapon repair 3,F 175 
an DiG 2.F 10 Walker repair 3 175 
Hide 3 175 P 
Investigation 2 100 
Persuasion 3 125 
Search 9) 150 INSTALLATION 
Sneak 3 200 Once the price is decided upon, the character con- 
structing/upgrading the droid must make a droid pro- 
gramming roll to install the SkillWare. Use the Time 
STRENGTH SKILLWARE Taken table (from page 21) and the information from 
the SkillWare Installation Difficulties chart (page 25) 
Skill Availability Cost(per D) to install the SkillWare. 
Brawling 3R 250 Example: Dug wants to install the sensors 
Climbing/jumping 3 75 SkillWare onto his PR6 unit. The droid is „an 
Lifting 2 50 astromech (a second degree droid) and sensors is a 
Stamina 3 150 Mechanical skill. The 
Swimming 2 200 


SKILLWARE DEGREE MULTIPLIERS 
Degree 
Attribute First Second Third Fourth 
Dexterity x2.5 x3 x3 xl 


Knowledge x1.5 x2.5 xl x3 
Mechanical x3 x1.5 

Perception x2 x2 x1.5 x2 
Strength x3 x3 x3 

Technical xl xl x2 x3 


FANTASTIC ES ae 


SKILLWARE INSTALLATION DIFFICULTIES 


Second 

Very Difficult 
Difficult 

Easy 
Moderate 
Difficult 
Easy 


First 

Very Difficult 
Moderate 
Difficult 

Easy 
Difficult 
Easy 


Attribute 
Dexterity 
Knowledge 
Mechanical 
Perception 
Strength 
Technical 


sensors SkillWare is listed at 75 credits per D in the 
SkillWare Catalog. PR6 has a x1.5 multiplier for Me- 
chanical skills, so sensors costs 113 credits per die ( 
75 x 1.5=112.5, rounded up to 113 credits). Dug 
decides to purchase 2D worth of sensors to bring PR6' 
s sensors skill to 4D+1, with a total cost of 226 
credits. 

Like TraitWare, SkillWare datacards are erased 
after installation. If the droid programming roll is 
failed, the information on the datacard is lost and a 
new datacard must be purchased. 

Example: When Dug attempts to install 2D 
sensors SkillWare on his astromech, he rolls his 
droid programming skill twice (one roll per D) 
against an Easy difficulty. (Installing a 
Mechanical skill on a second degree droid is an 
Easy task.) Dug's first roll is a"7," allowing 1 D of 
sensors to be installed. His second roll isn't as 
good; he gets a "1" on his Wild Die, ending up 
with a total of "4." The second D of sensors 
doesn't install properly and Dug must purchase 
another D to attempt to install it again. 


UPGRADING SKILLWARE 


Droids, during the course of a gaming session, are 
given Character Points by the gamemaster in much 
the same way an organic player character is. A droid 
can improve its own skills through the use of 
Character Points provided the following criteria are 
met: 

e The droid must have at least 1 D of SkillWare 
installed over the governing attribute. For example, a 
droid with Dexterity 3D and blaster 4D can improve 
its blaster skill with Character Points. If the droid has 
Knowledge 2D and has added no skill dice to cultures, 
ID of cultures must be purchased and installed before 
the droid is allowed to improve the skill using 
Character Points. 

Example: After a time, PR6 has gained several 
Character Points and wants to improve its SkillWare. 
Its sensors skill is currently at 4D+ 1, 2D over the 


Degree 
Third 
Difficult 

Easy 
Moderate 
Easy 

Very Difficult 
Difficult 


Fifth 
Moderate 
Very Difficult 


Fourth 

Easy 

Very Difficult 
Difficult 
Moderate 
Easy 
Difficult 


Difficult 
Easy 
Easy 
Moderate 


Mechanical attribute. PR6 is able to spend Character 
Points normally, increasing its sensors skill to 5D+1. 

However, PR6-3 has not added any dice to blaster, 
the droid cannot spend Character Points to upgrade its 
blaster die code. Instead, 1D of blaster SkillWare 
must be purchased and installed, after which PR6-3 
may spend Character Points towards skill 
improvement. 


EQUIPMENT AND 


ATTACHMENTS 
Once the droid has had SkillWare installed, it is 
often necessary to purchase and install equipment and 
attachments. The items that follow allow a droid to 
better perform its primary function, (and some less- 
than-primary functions). 


EQUIPMENT 


Many droids, like organic creatures, have the ability 
to pick up and use any piece of equipment they 
encounter (though they will not necessarily have the 
programming to use the equipment effectively). Most 
droids come with standard equipment to facilitate 
their primary programming. Equipment can be 
purchased for a droid in the same manner that it can 
be purchased for a character. 

If the droid has any manipulator limbs (hands, 
graspers, and so forth), the droid may simply pick up 
and use most types of equipment, provided the droid 
has the necessary programming. There are times, 
however, when the droid's owner will wish to make a 
piece of equipment an integrated part of the droid. 
When attempting to install a piece of equipment, 
purchase it as you would for any other character. The 
price of the equipment is increased by 25% for "droid- 
ready" equipment (equipment that has been 
constructed with droid installation in mind). 

Characters may install the equipment using droid 
repair. The difficulty for installation is based on the 
availability of the equipment that is to be installed. 

If the equipment availability contains two codes (i. 

e. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


Tra 


RYBETTIAN SHAC 


Ramsey Lanclo was muttering to himself, an 
endless stream of exotic Soccoran curses and pan- 
icked exclamations. Lanclo gingerly operated his 
freighter's controls, cautiously connecting the 
Chicanery's airlock to the boarding tube that a 
nearby Imperial Customs Frigate had extended. 
Ramsey hadn't shipped any contraband for over six 
standard months, but money was getting tight and 
his cargo bay currently held enough glitterstim to 
make him an incredibly wealthy man ... or see him 
sentenced to Kessel for the next 1,000 standard 
years. "7 knew I should have stuck to prefabs and 
power generators," he shouted, shaking his fist at 
the Imperial vessel that filled his viewport. "How 
are we going to get out of this one?" 

"What seems to be the problem?" Ramsey's droid, 
XDL-67 ambled into the cockpit. XDL barely re- 
sembled the cook-droid it had once been. Its mixer 
arm had been replaced with a functional hand, and 
its programming had been enhanced to include 
general starship maintenance and repair. 

"The problem," Ramsey explained, glaring an- 
grily at the droid, "is that in less than three minutes 
this ship will be crawling with Imperials. And we've 
got no way of stopping them from finding our 'spe- 
cial' cargo." He leaned against the bulkhead and 
tried to look nonchalant. XDL glanced at the moni- 
tor displaying data from the external holocam. 

"Captain, isn't that Agent Hewat's frigate?" XDL 
gestured at the insignia and markings that were 
now clearly visible on the Customs vessel's hull. 

"I think so. So what?" 

Instead of answering, XDL turned and faced aft, 
emitting a baritone moan from its vocoder grille. 
Ramseywinced at the noise, knowing what it meant. 
The sound of scrapes on steel deck plate answered 
XDL's call. Within seconds the captain's pet-a 
curious marsupial called a "keon"-bounded into 
the room. The diminutive creature circled Ramsey's 
leg and scurried up his body, finally finding a perch 
on the freighter captain's shoulder. 

"Hey, what's the big idea bringing the rodent into 
this?" Ramsey asked, scowling at his mechanical 
counterpart. Before it could respond, the droid was 
silenced by the distinctive hiss of the airlock's 
admittance cycle. 

Two stormtroopers-blaster rifles sweeping 
around the room with menacing precision-en- 
tered in unison, taking up guard positions on either 
side of the airlock. A moment later, a human female 
wearing the uniform of an Imperial Customs agent 
followed. Ramsey tried not to wince at the woman's 
caustic smirk; from bitter experience, Lanclo knew 
that 


Hewet's smile meant trouble. At the first sign of the 
new arrivals the keon hid behind Ramsey's 
head. The stormtroopers took position on either 
side of the airlock as she stepped forward. Ramsey 
grinned at the agent and spoke. 

"Agent Hewet," Lanclo said, displaying his most 
charming smile. "So pleasant to see you again. 
How've you been?" 

"Cut the smoke, pilot." She removed her gloves 
and placed her hands on her hips. "My sources tell 
me you've been to see the Rybet." Ramsey knew she 
meant Moruth Doole, a rather nasty individual who 
ran the smuggling ring out of Kessel with an iron 
fist. 

"Who, me?" Ramsey forced a laugh. "C'mon. You 
know I went legit a long time ago." 

From somewhere in the room, a tiny, high-pitched 
voice squeaked, echoing the smuggler's previous 
statement: "C'mon-You-legit-ago!" 

Agent Hewet glanced around the room. "What 
was that, Lanclo?" 

As if in response, the keon popped its head 
out from behind Ramsey and mimicked the 
Imperial: "What-Lanclo?" 

She looked up in surprise. An evil grin played 
across her face. "Captain," she said, a predatory 
smile tugging at her lips. "Do you have a permit for 
that ...creature ? 

Ramsey bowed his head. "I'm afraid not," he 
replied. XDL took a short step forward. Ramsey 
jerked suddenly in surprise at having forgotten the 
droid was there. Oh, am Igonnagetyou forthis droid, 
he thought to himself. This time I'm gonna pull you 
apart and build a trash compactor out of your shell. 

"Ma'am," the droid drawled, bowing its head in a 
fair approximation of human obsequience. "If I 
remember correctly, don't you have a daughter on 
Yityl?" 

Agent Hewet looked at the droid, shocked to be 
addressed by a mechanical. The stormtroopers 
raised their blasters to a more comfortable posi- 
tion. A position aimed in XDL's general direction. 

"Yes," she said, her voice brittle as Hoth ice. "I do 
have a daughter. How does this concern you?" ( 
"Daughter-concern," echoed the keon.) 

"Well, madam agent," he continued, "it will be 
some time before we arrive at an Imperial dock to 
purchase a permit and license for this little fellow." 
Ramsey's head slowly rose, knowing what the droid 
was getting at. "Perhaps you would like to take it off 
our hands." Hewet crossed her arms. 

"And why would I want to do that, droid?" 

"With respect, Agent Hewet, you could bring 
your daughter a lovely pet, and it would save us the 
trouble of having to port specifically to acquire a 


permit." XDL hunched down a bit, signifying that 
it was through speaking while Agent Hewet 
studied the keon. It flicked its tail back and forth, 
huge eyes gazing at the customs agent. She sighed, 
and grinned at it, which made its ears perk up. She 
moved towards Ramsey. 

"Captain," she said. "What do you think? My 
little Kora would like a new pet..." Ramsey couldn’ 
t believe his ears. 

"Well certainly, Agent Hewet," he heard 
himself say. "I've only had her for a couple of 
weeks. I haven't even thought up a name for her 
yet. I'm sure we can reach some kind of 
arrangement..." 


Ramsey sat in the captain's chair of the Chica- 
nery as the customs frigate pulled away. 

"You wanted to see me, sir?" XDL said, 
entering the cockpit. 

"Yeah," Lanclo growled. 


"You just cost me 1,500 credits with that stunt. 
That keon wasn't cheap, you know!" 

"True, Master Lanclo," the droid said as he mo- 
tioned to the cargo containers at the front of the 
ship. "But consider the alternative: you could be 
mining that stuff while I prepare Rybettian Shac 
for Moruth Doole. It appears to me that the price 
you paid for the keon is a fair concession to make 
to avoid a life sentence to Kessel." 

Ramsey sat back in his chair and thought for a 
moment. "Okay, you have a point," he said with a 
laugh. "Next time I threaten to memory wipe you, 
remind me of Rybettian delicacies and the joys of 
spice mining." 

XDL turned to exit the cockpit and return to its 
duties, and for a split-second, Lanclo was con- 
vinced that the droid actually managed to look 
insufferably pleased with itself before vanishing 
into the bowels of the Chicanery. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOG 


eee 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
Tra 


EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION 
DIFFICULTIES 


Base Difficulty 
Easy 
Moderate 
Difficult 
Very Difficult 
Difficult 
Very Difficult 
Heroic 


Availability 


3,X), two droid repair rolls must be made to install 
the equipment. If the character attempting to install 
the equipment rolls a "1" result on the Wild Die, the 
installation attempt fails catastrophically, destroying 
the equipment. Any subsequent attempts are one 
difficulty level higher, and these penalties are 
cumulative. 

Equipment installed: The piece of equipment 
is installed and functions normally. 

Installation attempt fails: The installation 
failed, but may be attempted again, though 

subsequent attempts are increased one difficulty 
level; penalties are cumulative. 

Equipment takes 2D damage: Roll 2D damage 
against the equipment's Strength rating. (Nor- 
mally standard character-scale equipment has 
Strength of 2D to resist such damage.) 

Equipment destroyed: The character 
thoroughly botched the installation attempt and 
the equipment is damaged beyond repair. If this 
result is obtained after a character rolls a "1" on 
the Wild Die, the failure is doubly catastrophic; 

a short circuit or other malfunction inflicts 4D 
damage on the droid as well. 


ATTACHMENTS 


When a piece of equipment is modified or comes 
with resident SkillWare (giving the droid a bonus to a 
skill roll), it is considered an attachment. Essentially, 
equipment is considered to be an attachment if it 
meets any of the following qualifications: 
¢ The equipment has resident SkillWare (i.e. it boosts 
a droid's skill). 

e The equipment provides a special ability or function 
(such as giving the droid a Move rating or a special 
skill of some sort). 

Most attachments are simply improved or modified 
equipment, however some attachments are special- 
ized and have classifications to themselves. These are 
described below. 


DATABASES 


Databases give droids bonus dice to Knowledge 
and Technical skills. Like SkillWare, databases are 
purchased by 1D at a time and must be installed. 
Unlike SkillWare, the price per die of a database is 
constant for all degree of droids. Once a database is 
installed, it cannot be modified. A droid's behavioral 
circuitry matrix allows for one database at a time. 
Attempting to install a second database of any type 
will cause a programming conflict and void the 
effects of both. 


DATABASE INSTALLATION 


Database Die Code 
+1D 
+2D 


Base Difficulty 
Very Easy 
Easy 
Moderate 
Difficult 
Very Difficult 


+3D 
+4D 
+5D 


OPTIONAL INSTALLATION SUCCESS CHART 


Skill roll versus Difficulty Number 
Skill roll > Difficulty Number 

Skill roll < Difficulty Number 

Skill roll+10 < Difficulty Number 


Skill roll x 2 < Difficulty Number 


Result 

Equipment installed 
Installation attempt fails 
Equipment takes 2D damage 
Equipment destroyed 


OPTIONAL INSTALLATION GUIDELINES 


If greater detail is desired, the gamemaster can use the above difficulty guidelines to determine the 
success or failure of attempt to install new equipment on a droid. 


Only Knowledge and Technical skills may be given 
bonuses in this fashion; however, since databases are 
attachments, they do not have a "degree multiplier” to 
the price. (In effect, attachments are less expensive 
than upgrading SkillWare and TraitWare.) 

Databases may boost a droid's skill from + 1 D to + 
5D. The cost of the database is the base price for the 
SkillWare per D, as found in the SkillWare catalog. 
Installing the database requires a single droid 
programming roll, using the following difficulties. 


Example: Dug decides to install a 
Knowledge: planetary systems database to his 
second degree droid, PR6-3. The database he 
chooses will give PR6 +2D to all planetary 
systems rolls. The SkillWare for planetary 
systems costs 75 credits per die. Because this is 
an attachment, there is no degree multiplier for 
the price. So the database total is 150 credits. Dug 
must now install the database. Because Dug is 
installing a +2D database, the difficulty for his 
droid programming roll is Easy. 


LOCOMOTION 


Most droids move under their own power. A 
variety of locomotive attachments are available to 
provide a droid with a higher Move rating (wheels, 
legs, treads, and repulsorlifts, for example). Each 
come in a variety of models and Move ratings. Legs 
and wheels are the most common, largely because 
they are relatively inexpensive. 


e Wheels. Wheels are less-expensive attachments 
than legs simply because they have a more difficult 
time moving over terrain. Any motion that requires a 
movement roll is one difficulty level higher; 
Moderate terrain becomes Difficult, Difficult terrain 
becomes Very Difficult, and so forth.) 


e Legs. Droid legs react to terrain difficulties in the 
same way any organic's legs would. 


¢ Treads. Treads make movement over terrain easier 
(terrain difficulties are decreased by one level). 


* Repulsorlifts. Droids equipped with repulsorlifts 
have no difficulty over any terrain, though they may 
need to make movement rolls to maneuver around 
objects. 


Many droid designers use a combination of systems 
to give the droid a larger range of movement. In these 
cases, the droid will usually have two move ratings. If 
there are two types of locomotion on a droid (such as 
a typical R2 unit, for example), and the Move ratings 
are identical, only one Move will be given. 

The installation difficulty for locomotion depends 
solely on the mode purchased. Wheels are Easy to 
install, legs are Moderate, treads are Difficult, and 
repulsorlifts are Very Difficult. 


Note: Gamemasters may wish to allow their players 
bonuses for having multiple locomotive attachments. 


FANTASTIC TEC Saggy ail 


BROS > 


For example, multiple legs may provide the droid with 
a Move bonus. 

Use the following table to determine the base cost 
of a particular locomotive attachment; all prices are 
given in standard credits: 


LOCOMOTIVE TYPE 
Move Wheels Legs Treads Repulsorlift(s) 

1 50 100 150 200 

2 100 200 300 400 

3 150 300 450 600 

4 200 400 600 800 

5 250 500 750 1,000 
6 300 600 900 1,200 
7 350 700 1,050 1,400 
8 400 800 1,300 1,600 
9 450 900 1,450 1,800 
10 500 1,000 1,600 2,000 
11 550 1,100 1,750 2,200 
12 600 1,200 1,900 2,400 
13 650 1,300 2,150 2,600 
14 700 1,400 2,300 2,800 
15 750 1,500 2,450 3,000 

Example: Dug decides that PR6 should have 


wheels as its primary mode of locomotion. He spends 
350 credits to give PR6 a Move of 7. Because PR6 
doesn't have a very high Dexterity, Dug doesn't want 
the droid to have difficulty moving across rough 
terrain, so he also purchases a repulsorlift with a 
Move of 3 for 600 credits. The droid will have an 
easier time traveling over rougher terrain, though at a 
slower speed. PR6's Move rating is 7 (wheels); 3 ( 
repulsorlift). 


SENSORS 


Sensors are detection devices that can absorb out- 
side stimuli and feed the data to a droid's main proces- 
sor for interpretation. The term "sensors" encom- 
passes standard photoreceptors (or droid "eyes") and 
auditory sensors ("ears") to long range movement and 
combat sensors. Most droids are equipped with sen- 
sors of some kind, visual and auditory being the most 
common. Generally these sensors can detect stimuli 
within normal human range, though many droids have 
upgraded sensing apparatus. 

Other sensors will add dice to a droid's search skill 
for specified target (such as moving targets, organic 
targets, and so on). When purchasing and installing 
sensors, the character must take into account how the 
specific sensor will aid the droid in performing its 
duties. A protocol droid has little use for combat 
motion sensors, though a guard droid or scouting 


Kot TTT 


hi 


a, o I [E 
E K LA iy 
Af, Pa a 
PIEP 


droid may find such sensitivity necessary. Ocular, 
olfactory, and audio sensors with a standard human 
range may be purchased for approximately 100 cred- 
its. 

Enhanced sensors increase the cost of the attach- 
ment. General purpose sensors, or sensors that track 
five or more types of targets are considerably more 
expensive than standard sensing apparatus. Multiply 
the base cost of such equipment by 10; It is usually a 
better (and cheaper) idea to install secondary or ter- 
tiary sensors systems. 

A sensor's price is based on the amount of dice it 
adds to the droid's search skill. In addition, the 
number of target types available to the sensing 
apparatus increases the price. For example, a sensor 
that can only detect one type of target (such as a 
moving target, or a heat source) has no effect on the 
sensor's base 


SENSOR BASE COSTS 
Sensor increases search skill by: 
+1D 


+2D 
+3D 
+4D 
+5D 


price. A sensor that can track two target profiles 
doubles the unit's cost. Three or more target profiles 
triples the base cost, and so on. Use the chart below 
to determine the cost of the sensor to be installed: 

Note: Droid sensors cannot track more than six 
kinds of targets. 

Example: Dug chooses to purchase a sensor 
package that adds +2D to PR6's search when 
looking for objects at a distance (25 to 50 meters 
away), and sources of heat. He multiplies the 
cost of the 2D (300 credits) with the number of 
targets (in this case two), to arrive at a final cost 
of 600 credits. 

Not all sensors enhance the droid's search skill. 
There are some motion sensors which provide a 
bonus to other skills such as blaster, dodge, and so 
on. "Search" sensors are by far the most common 
however, and providing an extensive list of sensors a 
droid will possess is far beyond the range of this 
system. Gamemasters can decide on pricing and 
availability for other types of sensors that a character 
may wish to install on a droid. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


SENSOR COST MODIFIERS 


# of Target Types Cost is 
Available increased by: 


1 — 
x2 
x3 
x4 
x5 
x6 


OTHER DROID EQUIPMENT AND 
ATTACHMENTS 


ASTROGATION BUFFER 


An astrogation buffer allows a pilot to set aside a 
small portion of droid memory to store a backup of 
current astrogation and navigation data. While the 
droid cannot access or alter this data, a pilot can 
scomp-link the unit into a nav computer (in effect, 
using a droid as a backup navigation computer). 
While this is not a recommended means of 
navigation, an astrogation buffer can save lives in 
cases where a nav computer has been disabled or an 
astrogator has been incapacitated. 


ASTROGATION BUFFER 


Model: Cybot Galactica "Lifeline" Astrogation Buffer 

Type: Nav data backup system 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 1,300 

Availability: 2, F 

Game Notes: An astrogation buffer can store one set of nav 
coordinates indefinitely; note that any attempts to load more 
than one set of coordinates into the buffer will fail, the newest 
data overwriting the older information. A scomp-link (and a 
Moderate computer programming/repair roll) allows this data 
to be downloaded into a nav computer, after which the 
information is deleted. 


CARGO WINCH 


A winch is a simple mechanical device for pulling 
or lifting, made up of a small drum around which a 
rope or cable-attached to the item being moved-is 
tied. The rotation of the drum raises or lowers the 
load as desired. Typically, a droid equipped with a 
winch is used to lift or lower cargo aboard freighters ( 
although droids that accompany scouts are sometimes 
equipped with them). 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


CARGO WINCH 
Model: Utilitech AR5G Cargo Winch 
Type: Small cargo-lifting device 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Lifting 
Cost: 400 (for basic unit), 800 (for heavy lifting winch) 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: A cargo winch typically comes equipped with 
50 meters of durasteel cable, and is capable of supporting 80 
kilograms (though the droid must anchor itself; factors such 
as unstable or uneven ground can increase the lifting difficulty 
by one level). A heavy cargo winch is also available; it 
performs much like a standard winch but gives the droid +1D 
to lifting attempts. 


CIRCULAR SAW 
Another common droid attachment is a small, 
highspeed circular saw; these durasteel blades are 
capable of cutting through thick power cables, heavy 
foliage, syntherope and other obstacles. Such devices 
can be mounted externally or installed in internal 
compartments of a droid. 


CIRCULAR SAW 
Model: Industrial Automaton Type 10 Cutting Saw 
Type: Circular saw 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Any appropriate repair skill; use melee combat: circular 
saw in combat 
Cost: 500 (for external model), 1,200 (for retractable internal 
model; droid must be a minimum of 0.3 meters long/tall) 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: The type 10 cutting saw does 4D damage and 
has a range of 0.3 meters. It can be used in combat, though the 
device's limited range and damage make it an impractical 
weapon at best. 


CONCEALED VIBROBLADE 


Vibroblades on their own are highly illegal in 
virtually every sector of the known galaxy. Several 
assassin droids that have been destroyed or 
dismantled have been equipped with a retractable 
vibroblade that was virtually undetectable to sensors. 


CONCEALED VIBROBLADE 
Model: Varies widely 
Type: Concealed melee weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 500 credits (basic version), 800 credits (sensor- 
resistant) Availability: 2, X 
Difficulty: Moderate 
Damage: Strength+3D (Max: 6D+2) 
Game Notes: A concealed vibroblade is typically housed in 
the wrist or finger on humanoid droids. The basic version is 
not undetectable (an Easy sensors roll reveals the weapon), 
though a more-expensive, sensor-masked version is available ( 
requires a Difficult sensors roll to detect the weapon). 


FINE WORK GRASPER ARM 
These small, retractable appendages allow droids 
that typically do not possess "limbs"--such as an 
astromech or power droid--to manipulate small ob- 


jects (computer keypads, small tools, and so on). 


FINE WORK GRASPER ARM 
Model: Varies widely 
Type: Droid appendage 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Lifting 
Cost: 350 credits 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Fine work grasper arms are retractable, folding 
into a small compartment in the droid's chassis. The arm 
extends up to 0.5 meters and has servo-boosted mechanisms 
in the joints and "fingers" (which allow the droid to type or 
manipulate small objects). There are a number of types 
available, some tipped with claws or pincers, others with 
three- or five-fingered "hands." 


HEAVY GRASPER ARM 
Like a fine work grasper arm, the heavy grasping 
arm allows a droid to manipulate objects that require 
some degree of manual dexterity. This type of arm 
has servo-boosted joints that allow it to lift heavier 
objects. 


HEAVY GRASPER ARM 
Model: Varies widely 
Type: Droid appendage 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Lifting 
Cost: 550 credits 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Heavy grasper arms are retractable, folding into 
a small compartment in the droid's chassis. The arm extends 
up to 0.5 meters and has servo-boosted mechanisms in the 
joints and "fingers" (which allow the droid to type or 
manipulate small objects and add +2D to lifting attempts). 
There are a number of types available, some tipped with claws 
or pincers, others with three- or five-fingered "hands." 


HOLOCAM 
Holocams can record and play back three-dimen- 
sional images of objects and individuals a droid en- 
counters. Law enforcement agencies often use droids 
for surveillance (with holocam recordings entered as 
evidence in a trial). 


HOLOCAM 
Model: Neuro-Saav TL3 Holo-Imaging Package 
Type: Droid recording device 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Sensors 
Cost: 2,500 (basic unit) 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: The TL3 holocam is designed specifically for 
droids; it is a small processing device that can be tied into the 
droid's existing optical modules, allowing a complete first- 
person view from the droid's perspective (up to 20 meters, 
limited by droid's line-of-sight). Images can be downloaded to 
datacards, dataplaques or holoprojectors, allowing playback 
and storage of the recording. The basic TL3 ties into the droid’ 
s existing optics, though only human-range recordings are 
possible. For an additional 200 credits per upgrade, the TL3 
can be adapted to record with the following improvements: 
macrobinocular hookup (improves range of recording to 100 
meters), all-environment (360 degree recording, in a 10-meter 
radius; playback appears as if the viewer is "with" the droid 
and can look in any direction to see 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


what else is nearby), thermal, motion sensor, and UV hookup ( 
records in "night-vision" mode with thermal/UV hookups; fo- 
cuses on moving objects with motion sensor option). 


HOLOPROJECTOR 

A device that can play back three-dimensional im- 
ages, the holoprojector is a common-and usefuldroid 
accessory. There are literally thousands of different 
types of holoprojector, from units that can play back 
images that are only a few centimeters tall, to those 
that can broadcast a recording in a 360 degree sphere 
up to ten meters away. The more sophisticated the 
unit, the more expensive it is. 


HOLOPROJECTOR 
Model: SoroSuub G-series Holoprojection Unit 
Type: Holoprojector 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 300-8,000 credits 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Basic holoprojectors-like those that are standard 
equipment on most R-series astromechs-can project a pre- 
recorded hologram up to 1.5 meters away, with an image size 
ranging from 0.5 to 10 meters. 


INTERNAL AUTOMAP 

An automap is a tracking device that allows a user 
to pinpoint his or her exact location on a planet. The 
automap (which can be tied into into orbiting weather 
satellites, traffic control stations or even the sensors 
of an orbiting ship) broadcasts relevant data back to 
the user, making it an extremely useful device. While 
there are several commercial models of automap 
available (typically small, hand-held units), this type 
is built into a droid. Automap data can be patched 
into a holoprojector or datapad, allowing others 
nearby to access the information. 


INTERNAL AUTOMAP 
Model: SoroSuub "AutoTracker" Droid GPS Module 
Type: Global positioning system 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 4,000 credits 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: It is virtually impossible for a character using an 
Automap to get lost. As long as the device is linked to an 
orbiting source of data (such as a ship's sensors or a weather 
satellite) the 
device relays accurate data regarding the user's location, local 
weather conditions, other moving objects and navigational 
hazards. The link requires a Moderate computer 
programming/re-pair roll once per hour to maintain. The droid 
using the automap link can automatically display this 
information on a datapad (with a scomp-link) or project it on 
any on-board imaging systems it possesses. 


INTERNAL COMLINK 
An internal comlink is-as the name implies-a 
communications device built into a droid. Like stan- 
dard hand-held comlinks, this type of device comes 
in a variety of forms, from voice-only signaling 
devices to encrypted data-transmission broadcasters. 
Some mod 


els allow monitoring of several frequencies at one 
time, while less-expensive (and more common) units 
are only capable of broadcasting and receiving on a 
single channel. 


INTERNAL COMLINK 
Model: Fabritech "VoxLink" Internal Comlink 
Type: Basic droid internal comlink 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Communications 
Cost: 100 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: The VoxLink has a broadcast and reception 
range of 50 kilometers in clear weather. It can monitor up to 10 
frequencies simultaneously. 


LINE CASTER 

The line caster is designed to work in conjunction 
with a cargo winch, though it is still useful on its 
own. The line caster fires syntherope (or durasteel 
cable or other such line) with great accuracy. When 
used with a winch, the line caster can be used to snare 
and retrieve fairly heavy objects from a distance. On 
its own, the line caster is useful for scaling walls or 
other steep inclines. (Typically, such climbs are 
performed by organics; without a winch attachment, 
a droid would find a steep climb exceedingly 
difficult.) 


LINE CASTER 
Model: Jabriel VCA Droid Line Caster 
Type: Cable delivery system 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: line caster (or Dexterity) Cost: 1,100 credits 
Availability: 2, F 
Game Notes: The line caster can fire a grappling hook and 
cable up to 50 meters (1-10/20/50) though some type of 
targeting SkillWare is needed to use the device effectively. 


ONBOARD BLASTER 

Like an internal vibroblade, an onboard blaster is a 
concealed weapon that is controlled by a droid's 
onboard programming. Such a weapon is typically 
retractable (since visible exterior weaponry on a droid 
would generate a great deal of official attention). 
Since most of these weapons are built from cobbled- 
together parts, the types available vary widely. 
Typically, internal blasters are built from standard 
blaster pistols and are powered by standard energy 
cells. 

Larger droids-construction units and other heavy 
equipment, for example-can mount more-powerful 
weapons (such as repeating blasters and DEMP guns) 
. However, most human-sized droids are forced to 
rely on internal weaponry analogous to blaster pistols 
(or heavy blaster pistols). 


ONBOARD BLASTER 
Model: Varies widely 
Type: Concealed energy weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster 
Ammo: 100 
Cost: 1,200 (basic), 1,600 (sensor-resistant), 25 credits ( 
power 


pack) 

Availability: 3, X 

Range: 3-10/30/120 

Damage: 4D 

Game Notes: Onboard blasters vary widely; the above stats 
are average. A basic version is visibly mounted on the droid 
and can be easily detected. A basic version possesses no 
sensor-masking or camouflage of any kind (an Easy sensors 
roll will detect the weapon). A sensor-resistant version is also 
available, making the weapon much harder to detect; a Very 
Difficult sensors roll or a Heroic search or Perception roll is 
needed to find the blaster. (Mounting a blaster on a droid's 
exterior is also possible, though the weapon can easily be 
detected by the naked eye; base cost for such a blaster is 800 
credits.) The damage code of the weapon can be increased + 
1D for every 400 credits the owner spends (maximum of 6D). 


ONBOARD FLAME PROJECTOR 

A flame projector ignites and sprays a chemical 
mist, which burns extremely hot and is heavy enough 
not to be deflected by sudden gusts of wind. The 
chemical, stored in a small tank, is toxic to most 
organic life, as it is highly corrosive. Droids are also 
susceptible to the corrosion, particularly if the chemi- 
cal is spilled near delicate circuitry. 


ONBOARD FLAME PROJECTOR 
Model: Varies widely 
Type: Droid-operated flame projector 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Ammo: 10 
Cost: 600 credits (basic), 1,000 credits (sensor-resistant), 200 
credits (additional ammo cannisters) 
Availability: 3, X 
Fire Rate: 1/2 
Range: 3-4/5/7 
Damage: 5D (first round, 3D for next five rounds unless 
extinguished) 
Game Notes: The basic version of the flame projector is 
detectable with an Easy sensors roll or a Moderate search or 
Perception total. The sensor-resistant version can be detected 
with a Difficult sensors roll or a Very Difficult search or 
Perception roll. A droid equipped with this type of weapon is 
susceptible to corrosion damage if the chemical tank that 
fuels the flame projector is damaged. (The chemical does 3D 
damage each round until it is washed off.) Internal tanks can 
be damaged if the droid is incapacitated. External tanks can 
be ruptured by stray blaster shots or physical blows; treat them 
as if they have Strength 3D to resist damage. 


ONBOARD GRENADE LAUNCHER 


Another form of onboard weaponry is a grenade 
launcher, capable of hurling small explosives a great 
distance with considerable accuracy. These weapons 
are extremely bulky and consequently any sensor- 
masking on them is less effective. 

ONBOARD GRENADE LAUNCHER 

Model: Varies widely 

Type: Concealed grenade launcher 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Ammo: 3 

Cost: 800 (standard), 1,200 (sensor-resistant) 

Availability: 3, X 

Fire Rate: 1/2 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


Range: 5-25/100/250 


Damage: Varies by grenade type 

Game Notes: The droid grenade launcher cannot be equipped 
on droids smaller than 1 meter; targeting circuitry and the size 
of the weapon make such installation impossible. The basic 
version of the weapon can be detected with a Moderate 
sensors roll or a Difficult search or Perception roll. The 
sensor-resistant version requires a Difficult sensors roll or a 
Very Difficult search or Perception roll to detect. 


SCOMP-LINK 

A scomp-link allows a droid to communicate with 
other computing devices or data storage systems ( 
such as datapads). The scomp-link is little more than 
a small metal "arm" with a series of interface ports on 
the end, ports that allow the scomp-link to "mate" 
with virtually any type of input/output jack. 

SCOMP-LINK 

Model: Cybot Galactica Nexus Scomp-link 

Type: Computer interface 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 800 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: The scomp-link allows information transfer 

from a droid to virtually any type of data-storage device (such 

as a computer, dataplaque or datapad). In addition, the scomp- 

link allows a droid to search computer networks for 

information (adding +1 D to computer programming/repair 

rolls). 


SENSOR-SHIELDED STORAGE 
COMPARTMENT 

A common addition to any droid in service to a 
smuggler is a sensor-shielded storage compartment. 
Like standard storage compartments, these attach- 
ments can be external (visible to the naked eye) or 
built into the droid (making such additions nearly 
impossible to detect). 


SENSOR-SHIELDED STORAGE 


COMPARTMENT 
Model: Ilegally-modified Utilitech Droid Storage Module 
Type: Sensor-shielded storage compartment 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 500 credits (external compartment), 8,000 (internal 
compartment) 
Availability: 3, X 
Game Notes: Utilitech storage compartments can hold small 
amounts of "cargo." External "storage packs" are generally 
magnetically sealed to a droid, and require a Difficult droid 
repair roll to remove. These packs are small (20 centimeters 
long, 10 centimeters, 8 centimeters deep) and can hold objects 
(such as a comlink, small blaster, datapad or medpac) that an 
owner may wish to retrieve later. External compartments are 
immediately visible but sensor-absorbent material makes it 
virtually impossible to detect what is inside (requires a Very 
Difficult sensors roll). Internal compartments can be detected 
with a Very Difficult search or Perception roll (or a Difficult 
sensors roll). Most droids of moderate size (1 meter or taller 
can be equipped with a maximum of two compartments). 


STORAGE COMPARTMENT 


Small storage packs or internal storage compart- 


FANTASTI TECHNOLOGY 


ments are melan useful--attachments. Ex- 
ternal storage packs are easier to install than internal 
units, but are easy to spot (making the droid a target 
for thieves). Internal compartments are difficult to 
install and are consequently more expensive, but are 
not detectable short of a sensor scan. 


STORAGE COMPARTMENT 
Model: Utilitech Droid Storage Module 
Type: Storage compartment 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 200 credits (external compartment), 4,000 (internal com- 
partment) 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Utilitech storage compartments can hold small 
amounts of "cargo." External "storage packs" are generally 
magnetically sealed to a droid, and require a Difficult droid 
repair roll to remove. These packs are small (20 centimeters 
long, 10 centimeters, 8 centimeters deep) and can hold objects 
(such as a comlink, small blaster, datapad or medpac) that an 
owner may wish to retrieve later. External compartments are 
immediately visible; internal compartments can be detected 
with a Moderate search or Perception roll (or an Easy sensors 
roll). Most droids of moderate size (1 meter or taller) can be 
equipped with a maximum of two compartments), smaller 
droids can be equipped with a single compartment (Utilitech 
custom-manufactures smaller compartments for the price of an 
internal compartment). 


WELDING LASER 
Many droids that see service aboard starships are 
required to effect repairs on damaged systems. Weld- 
ing lasers are often used to perform such repairs, 
particularly in the case of a hull breach; droids can be 
sent in to repair sections of a ship that have been 
opened to vacuum. 


WELDING LASER 
Model: Drever Corporation HLAutomata-Assisted Welding 
Laser 
Type: Welding tool 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Any appropriate repair skill; use blaster: welding laser 
in combat 
Cost: 1,200 credits 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: The HL welding laser is a small, versatile tool 
designed for ship-based repair efforts. The laser is small (5 cm 
long), attached to an external blaster power cell that can be 
strapped to a droid. The laser has a short range (3 centimeters) 
but is extremely powerful (5D+2 damage); the welding beam 
lasts for 10 rounds. If there is no power cell available, the laser 
can be powered for short periods of time by the droid's own 
energy source; such a hook-up requires 1D rounds and a 
Moderate droid repair roll. The beam will last for 5 rounds if 
powered by the droid. If the droid attempts to run the beam for 
longer periods of time, it must make a Moderate stamina or 
Strength roll (whichever is higher); if the droid fails the roll, it 
takes 2D damage each round until the beam is deactivated. ( 
Regardless, the beam will only last for a maximum of 10 
rounds.) 


PERSONALITY 


At the time of activation, some droids are pro- 
grammed with basic personality matrices. A droid 
personality matrix begins with a primary personality 
archetype which acts as the basis for a droid's person- 
ality. Over time (and without memory wipes) a droid's 
personality will mature and grow, customizing itself to 
its surroundings. Matrices come in a variety of types, 
much too many to list in this volume, so when a player 
is designing a droid, the gamemaster must judge the 
price and installation difficulty based on how complex 
of a personality is intended. 


PERSONALITY COMPLEXITIES 
There are five basic categories of droid personali- 
ties: none, simple, elementary, advanced, and com- 
plex: 

e None. The droid has no need for a personality; it 
will seldom interact with organics. A droid without a 
personality matrix may still communicate with both 
mechanicals and organics; it will simply tend to be 
cold and mechanical. Many fifth degree droids do not 
come with standard personality matrices. 

e Simple. Droids that come off the assembly line with 
simple personalities are required to be around organic 
beings only on rare occasion. Personalities of this type 
can be described in a single word (friendly, ornery, 
cruel, timid, and so forth). Power droids or some more 
sophisticated MSE-6s--"mouse droids"--have Simple 
personality matrices. Programming a simple personal- 
ity matrix from scratch requires an Moderate (A) 
droid engineering roll, or a Difficult droid 
programming roll. 

e Elementary. Droids with occasional contact with 
organics are usually programmed with Elementary 
matrices. (Astromech droids are usually required only 
to assist a pilot, hence, they typically possess an 
Elementary matrix.) Programming an Elementary per- 
sonality matrix from scratch requires a Moderate (A) 
droid engineering roll or a Difficult droid 
programming roll. 

e Advanced. Advanced personalities are installed on 
droids that need to interact with organics fairly often. 
The matrix used usually provides for limited 
intelligent conversation with organics, sometimes 
limited to simple information transfers and other 
pleasantries. Only after the droid has aged for some 
time will the unit display any "depth" of personality. ( 
Medical droids, for example, typically have an 
Advanced matrix). Programming an Advanced 
personality matrix from scratch requires a Very 
Difficult (A) droid engineering roll, or a Heroic droid 
programming roll. 

e Complex. The droid's primary function is to interact 
with organics regularly. Units that come with this 
matrix generally seem to be completely sentient. (Pro- 
tocol droids have Complex matrices, allowing them to 
engage in dialogue with organics in a manner not 
unlike another organic being.) Programming a 
Complex personality matrix from scratch requires a 
Very Difficult (A) droid engineering roll, or a Heroic 
droid programming roll. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
Tra 


DROI g 


PERSONALITY MATRICES 


Type 
None N/A 

Easy 
Moderate 
Difficult 


Very Difficult 


Simple 
Elementary 
Advanced 


Complex 


PERSONALITY INSTALLATION 

If the designer is programming the matrix from 
scratch (using the difficulty guidelines included in the 
above descriptions), there is no additional cost to 
installing the matrix. However, since more-sophisti- 
cated personality matrices are extremely difficult to 
program, the designer may opt to purchase a "ready- 
made" droid personality. Use the chart above to deter- 
mine both cost and droid programming installation 
difficulty (note that the designer may use either the ( 
A) droid engineering skill or the droid programming 
skill; only one skill roll is required). 


MAINTENANCE SERVICES 


Once a droid has been built, purchased, or other- 
wise acquired, it is up to the owner to make sure her 
mechanical stays in functional condition. The upkeep 
of mechanical intelligence is not half as daunting as 
one might think. "The occasional oil bath, memory 
wipe, and actuator adjustment makes for a long, 
happy life for your new droid!" reads the New Users 
Manual that comes with Industrial Automaton's 
droids. 

While standard maintenance is possible by the 
common droid owner, it is often much easier and less 
expensive to simply take the droid into an authorized 
center and have the droid serviced. 


REPAIRS 
Droids will inevitably need repairs; like any tool 
that is used heavily, a droid is subject to wear. 
Owners may attempt such repairs themselves or take 
the unit to a service center. Use the following table to 
determine the difficulty and cost of repairing a droid 
unit. 


(A) Droid Engineering Difficulty 


Droid Programming Difficulty 
N/A 

Very Easy 

Easy 

Moderate 

Difficult 


When repairing a droid, it is not necessary to pay 
for both service and parts. The service costs listed 
below include any parts needed. 


OIL BATHS 

Contrary to popular belief, an oil bath does not 
actually clean the droid. Rather, it simply lubricates 
the droid, allowing for more fluid and accurate move- 
ment. This is especially important on worlds that have 
harsh climates such as extreme heat or bitter cold. 
The droid is dipped into a tub or vat of lubricating oil, 
which loosens any debris and coats the droid with a 
layer of 
oil. 

Most droid service centers, as well as many 
starports, have facilities for oil bathing droids. The 
price of such a service depends greatly on the size of 
the droid in question; prices range from 50 credits for 
a small droid (such as an astromech) to 1,000 credits 
for a larger droid that is over two or three meters (a 
standard binary load lifter, for example). Beings and 
companies who own several droids often find it more 
economical to purchase a permanent oil bath to house 
in their workspaces. It should be noted, however, that 
it is unheard of for an oil bath large enough to be able 
to house a droid any larger than speeder scale. Droids 
larger than this usually require a maintenance team to 
manually oil and clean the droid. Often, the mainte- 
nance team itself is made up of droids. 

It is recommended that a droid be given an oil bath 
twice a season, if not more depending on the 
surrounding environment. If in fact a droid does 
spend a great deal in a harsh environment, eventually 
grit and corrosion will begin to effect its physical 
abilities. The gamemaster may choose to penalize the 
droid -1 pip 


DROID REPAIR COSTS 


Damage Level 
Lightly Damaged 


Difficulty 


Heavily Damaged 
Severely Damaged 
Nearly Obliterated 


Easy (droid repair) 
Moderate (droid repair) 
Difficult (droid repair) 
Difficult ((A) droid engineering) 


Cost (Parts) 
15% of Retail 
25% of Retail 
35% of Retail 
65% of Retail 


Cost (Service) 
30% of Retail 
40% of Retail 
60% of Retail 
95% of Retail 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


from Dexterity for each month a droid spends in a 
harsh environment without receiving an oil bath. 


DROID OIL BATH 
Model: Fryil Industries TD series bath 
Type: Droid oil bath 
Skill: N/A 
Cost: 50-1,000 credits (service), 1,500 credits (new, character 
scale), 5,000 credits (new, speeder scale) 
Availability: 1 
Game Notes: Oil baths are used to assist in the cleansing of 
droid movement control actuators. Giving a droid an oil bath 
negates all negative modifiers it had possibly acquired from 
existing in harsh environment for an extended period of time. 


MEMORY WIPES 


Erasing a droid's memory (referred to as "memory 
wipes" or "mindwipes") has become common practice 
among many droid owners throughout the galaxy. 
Since many droids are purchased used, new owners 
often decide they don't want the droid carrying inter- 
nal baggage from a previous owner. A memory wipe 
will strip the droid's memory banks of all previous 
knowledge, save for that hardwired into the droid. 
Once its memory has been erased the unit has no 
recollection of existing before the point that erasure 
took place. 

Widespread paranoia over rogue droids has brought 
the practice of memory wiping to the forefront over 
the past several centuries. Many local and system 
wide governments require all new or used droids to be 
memory-wiped. The theory is that a droid without an 
extensive memory will be easier to control. This as- 
sumption is true, to a point. If the droid came off the 
assembly line with a predisposed negative personal- 
ity, a memory wipe will not change this nature. That 
particular problem can only be addressed by an expe- 
rienced droid engineer with a background in personal- 
ity programming. Likewise, a previous owner could 
have hardwired skills deemed illegal into the droid, 
which would not be erased by a memory wipe. 

On the opposite end of the spectrum, many owners 
enjoy the companionship that can come from owning 
a droid who has had time to develop a complex 
personality. These droids often haven't had a memory 
wipe for many years. Depending on the physical age 
of the 


unit, some droids have over a hundred years of expe- 
rience to share. Many of the organic owners who 
would subscribe to this philosophy are criticized by 
their peers for endangering themselves and others. 
This is a societal conflict that seems to have no 
conclusion in sight. 


DROID MEMORY WIPE 
Skill: Droid programming 
Cost: 50-500 (depending on local fees) 
Availability: 1 
Difficulty: Difficult 
Game Notes: A successful memory wipe returns a droid's 
personality matrix to its basic configuration, removing any 
personality development that has occurred since activation or 
its last memory wipe. Also, any pips that were added by way of 
"tinkering" will be lost. Only those skills hardwired (by either 
the factory, a previous owner, or the droid itself) will remain 
intact. 


RESTRAINING BOLTS 


The use of restraint technology is often specified in 
most local criminal codes. Long ago, the Old Republic 
attempted to quell anti-droid sentiment by requiring 
droid owners to fit "restraining bolts" to their droids. 
These bolts are small receivers that are attached to the 
droid, allowing an owner to bypass the droid's motiva- 
tional programming. By using a signalling device, the 
owner can force the droid to perform certain simple 
actions. Typically, the restraining bolt forces a droid 
to activate or deactivate itself on command. 


RESTRAINING BOLT 
Skill: Droid repair 
Cost: 50 credits 
Availability: 1 
Game Notes: A droid fitted with a restraining bolt must obey 
commands sent by a "Caller." The droid cannot resist the effects of 
the restraining bolt. 


CALLER 
Skill: Droid programming 
Cost: 100-500 credits 
Availability: 1 
Game Notes: A caller is a compact, short-range signalling 
device that broadcasts directly into a droid's motivational 
processor (via a restraining bolt). Simple callers can only 
broadcast simple 
commands (such as ordering a droid to activate or deactivate). 
More-sophisticated callers can transmit commands of greater 
complexity (issuing orders that a droid must obey). The 
average range of a caller is 20 meters. 


INTRODUCTION 


Generating a droid player character in The Star 
Wars Roleplaying Game differs greatly from creating 
an "organic," or "normal" player character. In addition 
to using a completely different set of character 
generation rules, players who decide to portray a 
droid have to take into account a different form of " 
living" in the Star Wars universe. 


CREATING A TEMPLATE FORA 
NEW DROID MODEL 


Like all player characters, starting droid characters 
begin with a total of 25D. The major difference is that 
organic characters divide these dice between 
attributes and skills, whereas a droid character breaks 
these dice down between attributes, skills, and 
attachments. Organic characters generally have 18D 
for their attributes, leaving 7D for allocation to skills. 
Droids do not have this limitation. They are not 
subject to species' minimums and maximums like 
organics (though they are subject to the current state 
of technology). In the Classic Star Wars time frame, 
technology allows a droid no more than 13D in any 
particular attribute, with a minimum of OD. 

Because of this, it becomes amazingly simple to 
create a new droid type to use as a character template. 
Simply divide the 25D between the droid's attributes, 
skills, and attachments (equipment that provides the 
droid with a permanent skill bonus). Consult with 
your gamemaster during this process, as creating a 
character in this manner is much more collaborative 
than during the generation of an organic character. 
Talk with the gamemaster about what your droid's 
Move rating should be, what equipment it has 
installed and other such considerations. When a 
consensus is reached, the droid is effectively created. 

Alternately, your gamemaster may allot you a credit 
limit and have you use the droid creation/modification 
rules from the previous chapter. Usually, the cost of 
creating a droid suitable for a player character is 
between 3,000 and 5,000 credits. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


OPTIONAL RULE: BASING A 
CHARACTER TEMPLATE OFF AN 
EXISTING DROID 


When modifying an existing droid for use as a 
player character, character generation becomes more 
complex. There are some droids that are simply not 
suited for use as a player character (large units like 
logging droids or the construction droids from 
Coruscant, for example). The first thing you should do 
if you choose to play an existing droid type is to select 
a "stock" droid you like. (These droids can come from 
the "Droid Datalog" in this volume, or any other 
source.) All of the droids listed in this book are 
considered "stock"-they have not been modified in 
any way and are listed as they would be if purchased 
new. Count up the dice the new droid has allocated to 
attributes, skills, and attachments. Make sure to 
ignore any dice the droid receives from special 
abilities or story factors, as these usually only come 
into play at character creation, and are not counted in 
the characters standard 25D. For instance, the droid 
might have a special ability granting it any one 
Mechanical skill at 3D. Extra dice given in 
this manner do not count towards the droid's 25D. 

If the droid has exactly 25D in its attributes, skills 
and attachments, it is ready to be run as a player 
character; just copy down the droid on apiece of paper 
and (as far as game rules are concerned) that 
character is ready to go. 

If the droid model you wish to play has less than 
25D total, you can add the difference with "Build 
Dice." Figure out what your "build dice" are by 
subtracting the total dice from the droid you want to 
play from 25. The value you come up with is your 


build dice, which can be allocated to skills, and 
attachments, not at 
tributes. 

Example: Dave wants to play a Rim 


Securities’ K4-series security droid. The droid 
has a total of 20D in attributes, skills, and 
attachments. In this 


Roleplaying Droids $ N 


Chapter Three ¢ 


a |g 
Fr dl 
9 


TA 
TNN - 
D A 


e 
H \ 
| Neg 
E \ AT ‘ 
ANY 


case the Dave's droid has 5D of "build dice." ( 
25D minus the 20D listed in the template = 5D 
still available for skills and attachments.) Dave 
can add these 5D of "build dice" to the skills and 
attachments to his character. Remember, Dave 
can't spend these "build dice" on improving at- 
tributes. 


ADDING SKILLS 


Unlike a "normal" character, droids can spend more 
than 2D on improving a skill during character 
creation. In fact, a new droid character can begin play 
with a skill that is up to 4D above the governing 
attribute. In addition, droid characters taken from 
existing models start with skills already integrated 
into the droid type. Many droids already have at least 
4D above a specific attribute in some skills and such 
Skills can not be 
improved at the time of character creation. 

Example: Dave's K4 droid has a Dexterity of 
3D and comes off the assembly line with blaster 
7D, dodge 8D, and running 4D. Because both 
blaster and dodge are already 4D or more above 
the ruling attribute (in this case Dexterity), Dave 
may not allocate any of his 5D of "build dice" to 
those skills. Because running is only 1 D above 
Dexterity, Dave may add up to 3D to improve 
that skill. 

At the time of character creation only the 
player may 


use his build dice to give the droid skills that it didn't 
receive when it was constructed without shelling out 
credits. Like an organic character, these skills start at 
the same die code as the governing attribute. However 
the player may allocate up to 4D in any one skill. The 
player should consider what skills the droid should 
have in addition to what it comes with. Is the droid 
designed for a specific application? Does its current 
skill package serve that purpose? The player should 
also select skills appropriate to what he or she intends 
to use the droid for; just because the droid is designed 
as an accounting unit doesn't mean the owner will use 
it for its intended purpose. Is the droid destined for 
industrial intrigue or sabotage? Will it assist a smug- 
gler during a sophisticated confidence scam? Or will 
it wind up providing maintenance assistance or 
astrogation backup aboard a freighter? 

During this process, the gamemaster should be kept 
apprised of the droid's development. Gamemasters 
may wish to veto the use of certain skills on new 
droids unless the player can come up with an 
extremely good reason for having the skill. For 
example, there are very few astromech droids that can 
accurately fire a blaster, and fewer still that would 
actually want to. Without an adequate reason for the 
droid to possess such a skill (it has been specially 
commissioned with illegal software by a Black Sun 
Vigo, for example) the gamemaster may disallow it. 


NLY 


illustration by Joey Robinson 


FANTASTIC a a 


DROID CHARACTER TRAITS 


The following is a list of sample traits that a 
droid character may possess. They are intended 
only to spark some of the questions suggested in 
this chapter: why would a droid exhibit these 
behaviors? Players and gamemasters are 
encouraged to use this list as a starting point for 
creating more entertaining droid characters, 
though this list is by no means exhaustive. 

e Argumentative. No matter what is being dis- 
cussed, the droid will constantly offer an "alterna- 
tive viewpoint." Typically, these "alternatives" are 
little more than an excuse to argue. 

e Backup personality. A previous 
hardwired a "backup" personality into the droid's 
brain." When subjected to specific stimuli (such as 
damage, a code phrase, a transmission on a 


owner 


" 


particular comm frequency) the droid's alternate 
personality becomes evident. This personality can 
be very similar to (or completely different than) 


the droid's main behavioral matrix. 

e Center of conversation. The droid always tries 
to work its way into a conversation, dominating 
the exchange with pointless anecdotes or stories. 

e Curious. The droid has a strong sense of 
curiosity, constantly seeking answers to any 
questions that may puzzle it. 

e Exaggerates. When asked to describe something 
that it witnessed, the droid invariably inflates the 
specifics of the account (or its role in the event). 

e Glitch. The droid has a minor malfunction that 
has stubbornly resisted all diagnostic and repair at- 
tempts. (This trait would be more common to older 
droids.) For example, a protocol droid's 
vocabulator has somehow been damaged and the 
droid's voice sounds peculiar (a drawl, a strange 
accent, a "nasal" quality to its speech). 


DROID CHARACTER 
DEVELOPMENT 


Unlike an organic character, droids come off the 
assembly line prefabricated to be identical in almost 
every way. They possess the same skills and knowl- 
edge, the same equipment and attachments, and look 
exactly alike (save for their paint jobs). Each droid of 
the same model comes pre-equipped with an identical 
personality matrix, though these can change over 
time, with experience and programming. Where an 
organic character has learned her skills through 
schooling and life experience, a droid is programmed 
with necessary knowledge. Consider the following 
topics when determining a droid character's 
background and behavior: 


e Low self-esteem. The droid is convinced that it 
has somehow failed its primary function. Perhaps 
the droid strives harder to serve an organic master 
(in order to "atone" for the perceived failure); 
conversely, the droid feels that it no longer has 
worth and does not really try and operate at peak 
efficiency any longer (by never spending 
Character Points during skill rolls). 

* No self-confidence. The droid is convinced that 
its abilities are not equal to a given task. 

e Obnoxious. The droid has a tendency to say "the 
wrong thing at the wrong time" and is generally 
regarded as unpleasant. 

e Obsequious. The droid fawns over those it 
deems its "betters" (typically organic owners), 
constantly seeking their favor and approval. 

e Obsessive tendencies. The droid has an annoy- 
ing, obsessive quirk (such as a need to clean its 
surroundings, or sort fairly unimportant files or 
datawork). Sometimes this obsession with minor 
tasks prevents the droid from adequately perform- 
ing more important ones. 

e Paranoia. The droid is convinced that it has 
some sort of enemy, and is constantly worried 
that it is in danger. 

e Pompous. The droid believes it is "better" than 
other mechanicals (or organics; player's choice) 
and constantly makes disparaging remarks when 
such beings are encountered. 

e Sullen. The droid is very reluctant to speak or 
interact with other organics. Questions to such a 
droid must be very specific, as the unit typically 
responds with as vague an answer as possible. 

e Talkative. The droid simply can not stop speak- 
ing at inappropriate times. 


NAME/DESIGNATION 

The first thing you'll want to do after creating the " 
rules" portion of your character is to come up with a 
name for it. Droid names are generally made up of a 
combination of numbers and letters (C-3PO, FX-7, 
EV99, and so forth). These designations are not 
unlike serial numbers, and they often include the 
droid's model number as well as defining characters 
that separate the droid from others of its class. 

Most droid names include the unit's model number; 
R2-D2 is an Industrial Automaton R2 astromech unit. 
Most other R2 units have the characters "R2" some- 
where in their names, as well though they are not 
always pronounced. There are some companies that 


use words or symbols as a model designation, though 
these cases are rare (the Verpine Siak-series is one 
such example). Often, owners will spell out the droid's 
designation phonetically, giving the droid a more "or- 
ganic" name ("MD-18" becomes "Emdee-Oneight,” for 
example). Other owners have ignored the droid's name 
altogether, opting for a nickname of some sort. "Whis- 
tler" and "Mynock" from Michael Stackpole's X-Wing 
novels are examples of this. 

When choosing a name for your droid, take these 
things into account. There is no limit to the number of 
digits in a droid's designation; there could very well 
be a 3PO unit with a designation of Q32H-3PO-9ST 
somewhere in the galaxy. Usually, organics shorten 
longer names for ease of reference (so the example 
above could simply be referred to as "Kyu-three" or " 
Ohnine"). 


MANUFACTURE/DESIGN 


Of course, most of a droid character's traits will 
come straight from the mold from which it was 
formed. Whether the droid was of a type depicted in 
this book or was created from scratch, someone built 
it. (In general, the droid's manufacturer is found in the 
unit's game stats.) Consider the manufacturing 
company's policies regarding politics, society, the 
military, and so forth. How do those views affect the 
character's basic programming? While the very nature 
of a personality 


FANTASTIC TECHNO 


spioug BuAejdajoy e aauyy vaidey 


Nlustration by Joey Robinson 


matrix allows for learning and expansion on many 
levels, the beings who built the player character droid 
would instinctively leave traces of their personalities 
behind in the programming. 

Remember to consider the reason it was built in 
the first place. No matter how old the droid is, or how 
much the droid's experiences and adventures may 
have affected its development, there will always be at 
least traces of the primary programming left over. An 
agricultural droid may, during the course of its exist- 
ence, learn to fire a blaster, fly a speeder, or speak 
several languages. But the fact remains that it is still 
an agricultural droid. Keep this in mind when 
developing a droid player character. A battered and 
adventurous cook-droid may act like a brash pilot ( 
but it will still talk about food preparation a great 
deal). 


ACTIVATION 


Droids aren't "born," per se; they are "activated." 
When activation occurs, the droid's knowledge and 
personality are also activated. However, an older 
droid will have either been modified by a previous 
owner (or, in some cases, actually modified itself) 
over a long enough period of time. The time a droid 
player character has been activated can dramatically 
affect the droid's behavior. 


F 


eke 


Chapter Three ¢ Roleplaying Droids 


Illustration by Joey Robinson 


ANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


SIMULATED EMOTIONS 


Droids are often programmed to react in very spe- 
cific ways to their environment. Often, this program- 
ming is extremely sophisticated, resembling actual 
emotions a great deal. The emotional response pro- 
gramming a droid receives is related directly to its 


intended function. For instance, it is sometimes 
beneficial for an assassin droid to display aggression 
(or even outright anger), whereas a medical unit 
would most likely display compassion to facilitate 
interaction with organics under its care. These 
feelings are programmed into the unit at the factory, 
though the droid may develop and expand on the core 
emotional programming. 

It is up to the player to determine what emotional 
responses a droid character possesses. Base this on 
the unit's primary design, and take into account re- 
sponses the droid may have learned since it was 
activated. If, for example, you are playing a protocol 
droid who has somehow developed a very aggressive 
attitude and carries a big gun, decide where it learned 
to respond to situations in that manner. Was it inten- 
tionally programmed that way by someone? Or has its 
previous experiences molded the droids reactions? 
Perhaps the central programming core from an assas- 
sin droid was placed into the chassis of a protocol 
droid to avoid detection. Was this done by the owner, 
or was it the act of a free-thinking droid that wanted 
to 


avoid destruction? Thinking about the reasons why a 
droid character reacts the way it does helps make that 
character more convincing (and more fun to play). 


HISTORY 


The past is as important to a droid character as it is 
to an organic one--even more so in some cases. Be- 
cause many droids are several decades old, it may 
have been through many events that other characters 
have never experienced. By the time Artoo and 
Threepio came to be in the employ of the Lars family, 
they had already been through many adventures with 
other owners. The following guidelines can also help 
to "flesh out" a droid character: 


PREVIOUS OWNERS 

Depending on the age of the droid, it is quite pos- 
sible that it has served a number of masters, all with 
their own personalities and agendas. Deciding who 
these owners were can round out the gaming experi- 
ence by giving the droid a history from which it has 
learned (and modified its personality). Depending on 
the occupation of a previous owner (and how the 
owner used the droid's services) the droid may have 
had many adventures prior to the events of its current 
campaign. Remember when coming up with previous 
owners that they didn't necessarily purchase the droid, 
or use it for what it was specifically programmed for. 


Gy 


(Even a protocol droid can get a job 
working on a moisture farm simply 
because it speaks Bocce.) You can use 
the following character hooks as they are 
or as a groundwork from which to create 
your own ideas: 


J ) 
¢ A former owner was a government offi- PUUD P) 


cial of some sort: Imperial, Old Republic, PAIL 
; aN, 
or possibly a smaller system or planetary 
official. Under his ownership, you learned 
many things about dealing with politics 
and bureaucracies. Your master used you 
for a variety of tasks, including delivering 
private messages, light repairs on his star 
yacht, and watching over his children ( 
who were prone to causing all manner of 
trouble). 


¢ One of your owners had taken the time 
to train you how to lie. (He was a 
smuggler after all, and "a little backup 
with a con never hurt," he claimed.) You 
enjoyed the heroic nature of some of your 
more dangerous missions, even though 
you were the one forced to keep his ship's 
faulty hyperdrive motivator operational... 


spioug Buikeidajoy e aay vaydeug 


e A young bounty hunter took you as pay 
for a job. She never really needed a droid 
hanging around, but still you wanted to 
please your new master. While fulfilling 
your primary function (protocol, food- 
preparation, or other such task) you 
learned the basics of first aid, weapon 
repair and maintenance, and minor ship- 
board operations. 


¢ A small store owner bought you to help 
around the shop. While you were there, 
you met many "regulars" who came to 
know you on a personal level. The owner 
was a kind old man, and kept you well 
oiled, until you were stolen by one of the " 
regulars." Your existence has been a 
whirlwind of Black Market droid 
auctions, smuggling runs and menial labor 
ever since. You've seen a great deal, but 
you still want to find your kindly old 
master. 


e Pirates stole you from one of your own- 
ers when they captured him as a slave. 
They used you for administrative duties 
and when you weren't pushing Imperial 
slaver datawork around, the crew used 
you for target practice. During this period 
you lost a lot of vital circuitry but the 
ruffians always managed to put you back 
together again, albeit haphazardly. (You 
still can't manage to get rid of that fluctua- 
tion in your neck servos, though.) 


ltustration by Joey Robinson 


¢ After your last employment with an 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


Chapter Three ¢ Roleplaying Droids 


lilustration by Joey Robinson 


Bi N 
A A 

accounting agency, you were auctioned off to the 
head of a mercenary group. He let you keep all of 
your programming and knowledge, following his 
philosophy that "you never know when it'll come in 
handy." After some time with the group, they began 
installing new software and hardware on you. Now 
you can sneak into an enemy stronghold, plot an 


escape route for a personnel carrier, and figure out 
what the boss will save in salary, all at the same time. 


MEMORY WIPES 


Many droid owners make it a practice to memory 
wipe a new droid, and continue to do so as a part of 
the droid's regular maintenance. Has your droid 
player character ever had its memory erased? If so, 
how long ago? Was the technician competent? 
Remember that when a droid is memory wiped, its 
personality matrix resets to the factory standard. In 
some cases (depending on the technician's ability) 
remnants of the former personality are left intact, as 
well as memory fragments. 


MEMORY WIPES AND 
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 


From the time a droid is activated its personality 
matrix begins learning and developing. When a droid 
is mindwiped, the personality matrix and memory de- 
fault to the factory settings. The droid no longer 
remembers 


A i 
Ø ZNAN 
A m 

V) HANG 4) l 
AAAA 
its former owners or its experiences and is essentially 
"new" (save for any modifications or hardwired skills 
it has acquired over time). Nevertheless, many droid 
technicians don't do a complete job when erasing a 
droid's memory, and some personality quirks can be 
left over. This can make the droid more entertaining 
to play. 

Though the droid's memory has been erased, it will 
still know how long it has been since it was activated. 
It will also know that it had been mindwiped. In most 
cases, a droid understands that a memory wipe is 
simply part of existence, though some droids often 
wonder what they were formerly like, who their 
owners were, and so on. In certain cases, a droid's 
longing to understand its own existence has become 
obsessive. 

Remember that a mindwiped droid considers its 
history to be much shorter than it actually is. This can 
be used by gamemasters to alarming effect. Perhaps 
the character was a power droid refitted to process a 
cheater chip routine for its former master who was a 
sabacc gambler. Some of the victims who lost to the 
droid and his master might show up and remember 
the droid (even if the droid doesn't recall ever 
meeting the being in question). Perhaps the droid was 
reprogrammed for surveillance duty for CorSec and 
some of its law enforcement protocols are still in 
place; if the droid sees a crime being committed, it 
immediately signals for the local constabulary (which 
would be extremely embarrassing to smugglers at a 
shadowport). 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
EPEY 


Cynabar/37:8:1:47/Hute Welcome to ver- 
sion 4.7.1 of Cynabar’s Droid Datalog. Like 
the previous incarnations, this scandoc con- 
tains data stripped from various newsnet 
boards and archives, including Galladinium’s 
personnel manual and Imperial Defense Daily 
(which were not easy to slice, by the way). 

Since so many smugglers transport—or use— 
droids, | figured this collection would help keep 
you informed of potential abnormalities, quirks, 
and dangers involved with these automatons 
as well as helping crafty smugglers locate 
potential sources of profit. Yes, droids are 
essentially mechanical constructs with com- 
puter brains, but their complex circuitry often 
creates difficulties not expected by their de- 
signers. 

Bear in mind that the data I’ve cobbled 
together (at great risk, thank you very much) 
is as accurate as possible...but that doesn’t 
necessarily mean it is the truth. Feel free to 
post any comments you have to help correct 
any unintentional errors that have crept into 
the Datalog. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


beh 


2-1B SURGICAL DROID 


Model: Geentech/Industrial Automaton 2-1B Surgical 
Droid 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Alien species 5D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

(A) Bacta tank operation 5D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

(A) Injury/ailment diagnostics 5D 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

First aid 6D, (A) medicine 9D 

Equipped With: 

+ Computer interface tether (5 meters long). When con- 
nected to medical mainframe, 2-1B series droids receive 
a +2D bonus to all medical skills 

* Medical diagnostic computer 

+ Analytical computer 

+ Surgical implements 

* Medicine dispensers 

* Hypodermic injectors (4D stun damage) 
Move: 4 

Size: 1.5 meters tall 

Cost: 4,300 credits (new) 


One of the more successful surgical droids 
is the Geentech/IA 2-1B surgical droid. The 
2-1B series was the result of a joint effort 
between industrial Automaton and a little- 
known medisensor company: Geentech. 
(Geentech was later run out of business in a 
series of legal maneuverings by the larger, 
more-sophisticated Genetech, which claimed 
that the smaller company’s name infringed 
on several Genetech copyrights. ) 

Many of these versatile droids possess 
uncanny skill, specializing in fields like neuro- 
surgery and optometry. Some can even per- 
form advanced operations {such as the re- 
placement of damaged organs and limbs 
with cybernetic components), though each 
2-1B unit possesses a broad medical data- 
base. 

Availability: 2, F 

Personality Matrix: Advanced 
Javen/37:8:1:27/Core Yes, | agree. 
Genetech's surgical droids are excep- 
tional. But that doesn't give the corpora- 


tion the right to rip off the consumers who 
spend their hard-earned credits. You can't 
upgrade any unit of the 2-1B series without 
taking it to a approved service center, which, 
coincidentally is either owned or at least 
operated by none other than Industrial Au- 
tomaton. 


Dr. Bendics/37:8:1:25/Bese That’s not 
entirely true, Javen. Yes, upgrades are 
required at authorized service centers, but 
that particular requirement is mandated by 
Imperial law. When it comes to the health of 
its citizens, the Empire is not taking chances. 
Furthermore, the 2-1B has exceptional skill 
and flexibility, so upgrades are rarely re- 
quired. 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


A2 ACCOUNTING DROID 


Model: Genetech A2 Accounting/Business Unit 
DEXTERITY 1D 


KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Bureaucracy 8D, business 8D, value 7D 
MECHANICAL 1D 


PERCEPTION 1D 
Bargain 3D 
STRENGTH 1D 
TECHNICAL 1D 

pped With: 
e Hemispherical body with two fine manipulators 
+ Repulsorlift unit (2 meters ceiling) 
* Speech synthesizer 
+ Holographic recorder and projector 
Move: 10 
Size: 1 meter wide, 0.6 meters tall 
Cost: 8,000 credits (new) 


The A‘1-series business droid was an early 
Genetech design that went into production in the 
days of the Old Republic. As technology ad- 
vanced, the A1 was eventually replaced by the 
A2, which was originally intended to act as a 
personal account manager and negotiation-facili- 
tator for use in corporate environments. Unfor- 
tunately, Genetech's SkillWare engineers never 
worked the bugs out of the A2's personality 
modules, and as a negotiating tool the droid was 


an almost total failure. 

However, A2-series droids are adept at deter- 
mining market values for numerous products 
and are extremely efficient accountants, result- 
ing in their highly visible presence in the Corpo- 
rate Sector and the high-finance commercial 
environment of the Core Worlds. 


Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Advanced 
Callin/34:8:2:27/Tate The software for 
this droid was specifically designed for use 
in large corporations. According to a feasi- 
bility study conducted by the Corporate 
Sector ority (published in AutomataNet), 
Ae-series droids are actually 

when used by smaller corporations; incon- 
sistencies and errors often appear in the 
accounting scandocs. Small operations that 
bought into Genetech’'s marketing scheme 


often complain of droid malfunctions caus- 
ing faulty invoicing, late billing, and outright 
accounting errors. Small businesses be- 
ware! 


Dredin/34:9:3:51 /Care The A2's “flutter” 
is actually faulty SkillWare; an upgrade from 
Genetech is provided free to customers that 
complain loud enough. Too bad, actually, 
since I've actually managed to palm a few 
credits on the sly and pin the blame on a 
droid. I've even heard of corporate spies 
introducing un-upgraded A2s into the smaller- 
scale accounting departments of rival com- 
panies. Better than a computer spike for 
sowing confusion, | guess. 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


ARCHIVE DROID 


Type: Industrial Automaton A9G-series Data Storage Unit 
DEXTERITY 2D 


KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy: library science 4D 
MECHANICAL ID 


Computer programming/repair 5D 
With: 


Eq 

+ Kraren XI Superprocessor, allowing rapid data colla- 
tion 

* Cybot Galactica Data-Sifter software package (adds +1D 
to all computer programming/repair rolls involving data 
searches 


) 
+ Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head) 
Move: 9 


Size: 1.7 meters tall 
Cost: 8,000 credits (used only) 

The ASG was designed to handle the in- 
creased demand for computer and library sys- 
tem management, particularly in the areas of 
data storage, collation and analysis. A fairly 
straightforward construct, the ASG has a hu- 
manoid body with minimal attachments and sub- 
a paar Peres en awe eae Noe a 

its data-sifting software, which [in principle, at 


In 
api when placed into service in locations that saw 
volume of data-traffic, the ASG was prone 


and outright judgement. Still, for 
applications, the ANG is somewhat 


useful. 


Availability; 2 
Personality Matrix: Advanced 


“Mynock"/36:3:2:21/Nare The Rebel Al- 
liance seems to have a need for the ASG 
(probably because they have so much raw 
intelligence coming in from field agents). 
Anybody looking for a low-risk run to deliver 
a shipment of A9Gs out to the Roche 
asteroid belt, contact me at “Fathoms” (on 
Mon Calamari). 


ustration By Johannes Huber 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


AS-M12 MESSAGE DROID 


Model: Arakyd Seeker AS-M12 Message Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Planetary systems 3D 

MECHANICAL 1D 


Computer programming/repair 3D 
With: 


* Repulsorlift generator 
+ Visual and audial sensors 
* Vocabulator speech/sound system 
* Retractable fine work grasper arm 
* Holographic projector/recorder 
+ Computer I/O jack 

Abilities: 


Message security; A message droid will not convey its 
information unless a proper passcode ls given. Circum- 
venting this passcode requires a Heroic droid program- 
ming roll. 

Move: 10 

Size: 0.5 meters tall 

Cost: 4,000 credits 


The Arakyd Seeker message droid is one of 
the most reliable forms of system-to-system 
communication in existence, though its price 
tends to limit its use to military or corporate 
applications. The seeker is a compact globe 
seen the size of an astromech droid) with 

attachments that 


~ 
te ee eee $o 


system.) 
A large portion of the droid's programming is 
geared to the location and identification of a 
's intended recipient. Once the target is 
, the message is delivered; typically a 
password or other code phrase is needed to 
complete the exchange. 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Elementary 


Vox/34:8:2:27/Hune For those of you 
with a militaristic bent, I've heard of Arakyd 
Seekers programmed to hunt down targets 
and explode. The tech-specs I've seen are 
pretty simple: a small storage compart- 
ment, some detonite, a proximity detonator 
and the target's bio-signature. ; 


S’denSta/34:8:9:41/Mrle One problem, 
of course, is the unit’s onboard transit log. 
Many people don't know that the Seeker has 
a small data storage buffer hardwired into 
its directional module. The buffer stores the 
coordinates of wherever the Seeker was 
launched from (so it can find its way home). 
If you're going to use the droid for the 
aforementioned dastardly purpose, don't 
launch it from your back yard. 


lustration By Johannes Hider 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


MESSAGE DROID HYPERSPACE POD 


Craft: Arakyd Seeker Transport 

Model: Message droid hyperspace pod. 
Scale: Starfighter 

Length: 2 meters 

Crew: None (fully automated droid brain with astrogation 
4D, space transports 4D) 

Passengers: | message droid 
Consumables: 1 month 

Cost: 20,000 credits 

Hyperdrive Multiplier: x1 

Nav Computer: Limited to 1 jump 


Space: 6 

Atmosphere: 330; 950 kmh 
Hull: 1D+2 

Sensors: 


Passive: 20/1D 

Scan: 40/2D 

Search: 60/3D 

Focus: 3/4D 
Gunman/34:1:7:12/Elre The problem with 
the message droid is its susceptibility to 
spacejacking. The Alliance has managed to 
swipe a number of these little fellas pretty 

“easily. (The real problem is cracking the 

droid's security protocols.) 


Hartin/35:1:4:11/Nare Not a bad plan, 
Rebel-boy, but there is one major flaw in your 
scheme: a lot of criminaltypes modify Seek- 
ers to haul small cargo. Be careful if you 
decide to seize one of these droids—you just 
may find yourself on the run from an angry 
Hutt crime lord whose glitterstim you've just 
stolen. (And stay away from my Seekers, 
grubber!) 


LLELLE 

Aida 
|annannm | 
diiiiib 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


€ 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


EV SUPERVISORY DROIDS 


Type: Cybot Galacticn EN Geride Superviidi astromechs actually blew it out of the airlock. 
Brisnell/35:6:3:02/Slue | ran into some 
pirate groups in the Outer Rim that have 
modified EVs into torture droids and slave 
pen supervisors. It amazes me that 
MerenData was never publicly censured for 
introducing these vicious droids into com- 

markets. 


repair 4D, droid programming mercial 
5D, droid repair 4D+1 
Equipped With: 


seers BOOY CWO Sh Io egs; torso, head) 
binary comlink 
. o Broadband broadcast piaia gag system 
+ photoreceptors ers range) 


running an automated bulk freighter. Shortly 
before | upgraded to an EV-ll, my supervisory Mustration By Johannes Huber 
droid managed to mistreat the droid crew 
so badly that one of the more aggressive 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


FX MEDICAL DROID 


Model: Medtech Industries FX-series Medical Assistant 
Droid 


1 
(A) Bacta tank operation 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 


(A) Injury/ailment diagnostics 4D 
STRENGTH 1D 


TECHNICAL 2D 
First aid 4D, (A) medicine 5D 
With: 


Equipped 
e Medical computer scomp link: Interface to adequate 
medical computer or surgeon droid adds +2D to all 
medical skills. 
* Medical diagnostic computer and sensor 
+ Analytical computer and sensors 
+ Light manipulator arms 
* Primary manipulator arm 
* Various surgical attachments 
injectors (4D stun damage) 


Cost: 3,500 (used only) 


The FX-7 serves as an assistant to sur 
geons—organic or mechanical—and possesses 
a staggering array of sophisticated appendages 
capable of performing a number of functions. 
Typically FX-7 units are equipped with 20 arms, 
though Medtech constructed these droids in a 
modular fashion; the removal or addition of 
manipulator arms is fairly easy and inexpensive. 

While the FX-7 is a clean, uncluttered design, 
the series was eventually discontinued. Most 
surgeon droids are so sophisticated that an 
assistant is generally unnecessary and the FX-7 
simply does not have the skill to perform as a 
primary medical unit. 

Availability: 4, F 

Personality Matrix: Elementary 
Dharus/34:8:1:47/Pore Say what you will 
about these droids; despite their obsoles- 
cence, they are extremely affordable and 
work well given their limitations. 


Cormun/34:8:2:51 /Core Glad you like ‘em, 
Dharus. Hey, all you smuggler types, this 
guy is a privateer in the Parmel and Portmoak 
region. Looks like you can make some quick 
money running him replacement parts for 
his FXs. (And you know these privateers are 
used to getting price gouged! Heh heh heh.) 


Dharus/34:3:3:66/Pore Thanks a lot, 
Cormun. 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


GHT MEDEVAC DROID 


Type: TelBrinTe! GHT Medevac Unit 
DEXTERITY 1D 


KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Alien species: biology 4D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Search 4D, hide 3D 
STRENGTH 2D 


ipped With: 
* Four wheels (retractable) 
* Repulsorlift (capable of lifting the droid and one 
wounded individual of roughly average human body- 
type and weight, flight ceiling 0.5 meters) 
* Two photoreceptors (human and macro range) 
e Auditory receptor 
* Two reinforced fine work manipulator arms 
+ Reinforced hull («1D against physical and energy dam- 


age) 
Move: 11 (repulsorlift), 6 (wheels) 
Size: 1 meter long 
Cost: 5,200 credits 

TelBrinTel attempted to capitalize on the grow- 
ing medical droid market by releasing the GHT- 
series Medevac unit. The droid, designed for 
supporting battlefield medics (by retrieving in- 
jured soldiers, applying temporary first aid, and 
bringing the wounded back to a field hospital). 
The GHT is fairly good at its job, though detailed 
coordinates need to be fed into it in order for the 
unit to find the downed soldier. 


Availability: 2 

Personality Matrix: Moderate 
Gunman/34:7:3:92/Core After signing on 
with Churhee's Riflemen, one of my first 
assignments was maintaining a handful of 
GHT medevac droids. The major flaw in the 
design is the need to program the coordi- 
nates of downed soldiers into the droid’s 
guidance matrix; the installation of an inter- 
nal automap solved the problem (provided 
that forward units notified a central base of 
their position and status). 


Dralla/35:8:5:86/Atre Rebels on Derra 
IV had a few GHTs; by equipping forward 
troops with low-level transponders, the droids 
could zero right in on them when they were 
wounded. Unfortunately, the Imperials fig- 
ured it out and flooded the area with false 
transponder signals and destroyed any GHTs 
that showed up. That's the problem with a 
technological battlefield tool: somebody 
somewhere always has better toys. 


illustration By Johannes Huber 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOL 
LINY 


OGY 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
E 


IN-4 INFORMATION DROID 


Model: Veril Line Systems IN Information Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 


Computer programming/repair 4D 
Equipped With: 

* Box frame body 

* Treadwell locomotion unit 

* Video sensor 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 
s Extendible I/O computer jack 
Move: 3 


Size: 1.3 meters tail 
Cost: 2,500 credits 


The IN-4 information droid—constructed on 
the same basic chassis as the EG-series power 
droid—was one of Veril Line Systems’ accasional 
forays into commercial markets. Unlike 
other VLS attempts to create nonindus- 
trial droids, the IN-4 was a resounding 
SUCCESS; Sib every starport of Stan- 
dard or better class houses a large comple- 
ment of IN-4s. 

The droid’s primary function is informa- 
tion storage and retrieval; sie Sata such 
units provide directions or tourist informa- 
tion to travellers arriving at Bsns agen 
Often, IN-4s are program 
eral Shiah at pin dacol nekt 
——— S 


IF data that is not stored in the IN-4's 


ally hardwired into the IN-4 pate cannot be 
tampered with without destroying the unit. 


Availability: 1 
Personality Matrix: Advanced 


“KesselRunner"/36:2:5:14/Kes* Warn- 
ing! IN-4 droids are used by the Rebels for 
espionage activities...especially on 
Coruscant. Be careful not to undertake any 
illegal activities in the vicinity of these droids, 
because the Imps are keeping info units 
under surveillance. If you can see an IN-4, 
chances are COMPNOR can see you! 
“Corewatch”/36:2:6:21/Esse Even worse, 
the Imperial Center security forces have 
begun reprogramming IN-4s that are fre- 
quented by Rebels. A Rebel tries to use one 
for a message drop and ends up in custody 
at light-speed. 


lilustration By Johannes Huber 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


TTS-15 TUTOR DROID 


Model: industrial Automation TTS-15 Education and Tu- 
torial Droid 


Alien species 4D+1, business: economics 4D+2, cultures 
4D+1, languages 4D+2, planetary systems 4D+1, scholar 
3D+2, scholar: applied education theory 5D+2, scholar: 
galactic history 4D 

MECHANICAL 1D 


PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH ID 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Computer programming/repair 2D 
Equipped With: 


+ Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) 
* Two visual and auditory sensor recorders (human 


range) 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 

* Verbobrain 

* TranLang lI! Communication module 
Abilities: 


Special 
Education pack: Each droid comes preprogrammed with 
up to three specific areas of subject expertise to include: 
Galactic history, material and theoretical sciences, lan- 
guages, literature, multi-cultural literature, cultures, and 
mathematics. Specific programming selections and com- 
petence levels are selected prior to shipment. 
Move: 7 
Size: 1.5 meters tall 
Cost: 500 credit initial lease fee, 1,000 annual service 
contract fee, which includes routine inspection and pro- 
gram upgrades 

For those who view education as a serious, 
critical period of organic life, |A created the TTS- 
15 tutorial unit, a droid designed speci to 
teach needed skills. Advanced mathematics (the 
precursor to astrogation mechanics), galactic 
history (a necessary primer to galactic political 
history—which is of prime importance to nobles) 
and other subjects are srs with a significant 
level of success by the TTS-15 


Availability: 2 

Personality Matrix: Complex 
“KesselRunner”’/31:2:5:09/Kes® I've 
heard that Industrial Automaton is develop- 
ing a low-priced version of this droid for 
straight sale (as opposed to the current 
lease-only version). | guess the strategy is to 


start putting these things into as many 
homes as possible instead of target-market- 
ing the wealthy. 


Morsai/32:1:1:23/Quoe | think 
“KesselRunner"” is right; | just made a for- 
tune running a few tons of droid parts 
(vocabulators and TranLang Il communica- 
tions packages) to an IA distribution center 
on Travnin. | sense profit opportunities, 
friends... 


am iliustration By Christina Wald 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
#5 v F 


J9 WORKER DRONE 


Model: Roche J9 Worker Drone 
DEXTERITY 2D 


KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Alien species 5D+1, bureaucracy 5D+2, languages 4D+1 
MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+2, sneak 4D 

STRENGTH 1D 


With: 
* Two photoreceptors/ video sensors (Verpine range) 
* Bipedal locomotion 
* Olfactory sensor (+1D to odor-based search rolls) 
$ Torplex microwave sensor (+1D to security) 
* Arjan vocabulator 
¢ TranLang Il Communication module (+2D to languages). 
Move: 10 
Size: 1.9 meters 
Cost: 1,200 Credits 


The Verpine, iong known for their attention to 
technological detail, created the J9 as a protocol 
unit. Despite the droid’s sophisticated program- 
ming (some claim that the protocol module is 
more advanced than a 3PO0 unit), the droid’s 
extremely mechanical appearance doomed the 
project to commercial failure. 

The Roche Corporation learned-—after pro- 
ducing over two thousand JS Worker Drones— 
that the misleading nickname “Worker Drone” 
coupled with the droid’s low-end personality ma- 
trix and skeletal construction guaranteed that 
the droid would be overlooked bythe corporation's 
intended market: humans. Though the droids 
were practically useless for their intended pur- 
pose, many beings found the J9s to be easily 
modified, allowing the units to be put to work in 
other tasks, and living up to their designation as 
worker drones. 

Availability: 2 


Personality Matrix: Simple 
Baden/36:4:7:08/Roce Say what you will 
about the J9, but the blasted thing is ex- 
tremely easy to modify. True, the insect-like 
appearance is a little unnerving, but it kind of 
grows on you after a while. 


eee. uL 
Sana ae & 
| ensanse 


FIRST DEGREE DROIDS 


g 
we 
oc 


AD ARMORER DROID 


Type: Arakyd AD Weapons Maintenance Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 


TECHNICAL 
Armor repair 4D+1, blaster repair 5D, biaster repair: 
blaster artillery 5D 

With: 


Equipped 

e AA-12X Verbobrain 

+ Communications link with base computer 

* Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head) 

* Repulsorlift unit (hovers, flight ceiling 1 meter) 
s Visual/auditory sensors (human range) 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 

Move: 6 


Size: 1.5 meters tall 
Cost: 7,700 (used only) 

Arakyd originally developed the AD armorer 
droid to sell to the Empire, claiming that the unit 
could handle all Imperial weapons maintenance 
more efficiently than organic troops. Despite a 
long-running relationship with Arakyd, the Impe- 
rial command structure was skeptical and com- 
missioned a study of the AD in action. Unfortu- 
nately for Arakyd, the increase in efficiency was 
marginal (0. %) and therefore not worth 


investing billions of credits into purchasing new 
droids. 


Arakyd—wrongfully assuming that the Empire 
would once again buy one of their designs—had 


already begun producing the AD and suddenly 
found itself without a market. In a frantic series 
of negotiations and bulk discount deals, Arakyd 
managed to sell most of their stock ADs to 
mercenary units, local law enforcement agen- 
cies and bounty hunting guilds. 

Availability: 3 

Personality Matrix: Complex 
Frman/36:3:6:02/Cdre | modified my AD 
with a bunch of additional SkillWare; it can 
handle maintenance on all of my shipboard 
weapons as well as my personal gear. I'm 
hoping to upgrade it some more so it can 
handle conventional ship repairs in tandem 
with my astromech. 


Grannt/36:9:5:72/Pare Has anyone heard 
about a rogue armorer droid that used to 
work for House Salaktori? Apparently the 
blasted thing has decided it is some kind of 
bounty hunter now. {I laughed out loud when 
| heard about it.) 


Fuller/37:0:0:02/Pore Don't laugh; I've 
actually seen it. It is called GSAD-43 and it 
has upgunned itself considerably. Appar- 
ently, it is chasing after the killers who vaped 
its former master. The new ve ried: pack- 
age and weaponry that GSAD-43 has picked 
up are pretty formidable. 


illustration By Johannes Huber 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


FANTASTIC Lye ihe yg 


ARAKYD VIPER PROBOT 


Model: Arakyd Viper Probe Droid 
DEXTERITY 3D 


Blaster 5D, dodge 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Intimidation 7D+2, planetary systems 4D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D 


Astrogation 5D, communications 6D, sensors 6D, space 
transports: hyperdrive pod 5D 
PERCEPTION 3D 


Con 4D, hide 5D, investigation 6D, search 6D, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 4D 
TECHNICAL 2D+1 
Equipped With: 
* Multipurpose AEE PA 
+ Repulsorlift engine 
* Investigation and analytical computer 
+ Planetary sensor array with wide-range sensors: 


Passive: 16 meters/0D 
Scan: 100 meters/1D 


* Various recording devices 

* Broad-band broadcast antenna 

* Blaster (damage 4D+2, range 3-10/30/120 
Move: 12 

Size: 1.5 meters 

Cost: Imperial Issue (12,500 credits standard) 

The Arakyd Viper is the latest in a long series 
of deep-space probe droids used by the Empire. 
In the days of the Old Republic, ee 
used to place jump beacons, explore 

new star systems and to search for pirate bases. 
Now, however, the Empire uses probe droids for 
military purposes {specifically the identification 
and location of Rebel bases). The Viper pos- 
sesses numerous sensors capable of finding life- 
farms, energy sources, and other telltale signs of 
sentient inhabitants. Arakyd advanced their initial 


Rendric/36:4:3:12/Pare Anybody travel- 
ling in the Outer Rim Territories, be warned: 

the Empire is releasing thousands of these 
things. If youve got a heavy-duty tractor 
beam, you might want to try to obtain a few 


for yourself. {| hear the Rebels are offering 
fair bounties on Vipers.) 
Colmar/34:8:1:66/Nale Be careful when 
transporting these droids. They have sensi- 
tive circuitry and have been known to sud- 
denly turn themselves on during high-inten- 
sity maneuvers. An associate of mine 
snagged a handful of these things near 
Anoat and they ended up tearing through his 
hull. The Rebels may be offering a reward for 
Vipers—as are a number of other merc and 
pirate groups—but the risk may outweigh 
the profit. No reward is worth dying for. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


PROBOT HYPERDRIVE POD 


Model: Hyperdrive Jump Pod 
Craft: Arakyd Predator Jump Pod 
Scale: Starfighter 

Length: 4 meters 

Skill: Space transports: hyperdrive pod 
Crew: One probe droid 
Passengers: None 

Cargo Capacity: None 
Consumables: None 

Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 

— aaah 1D+2 


Space: 
Atmosphere: 225; 750 kmh 


Shield: ID 
Sensors: 

Passive; 10/0D 

Sean: 25/1D 

Search: 40/2D 

Focus: 5/2D 
Braggan/31:8:2:41/Yage The hyperdrive 
pod of an Arakyd Viper has a built in astro- 
gation buffer; | actually managed to swipe 
one and install it in my protocol droid. It 
works just as well as a commercial model, 
though if the Imps ever crack open my droid, 
rl probably get arrested. Still, if you are 
looking for an astrogation buffer aren't inter- 
ested in paying for it, you can find thousands 
of these pods in the Outer Rim. 


Jyrzk/31:6:4:03/Fore Has anyone tried 
hooking up the nav system and hyperspace 
engine to an escape pod? | would nevertrust 
such a system for transporting myself, but 
its a good way to durnp small contraband if 
the Imperials get too close. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


FLR LOGGER DROID 


Model: Greel Wood Logging Corporation/Industrial Au- 
tomaton FLR-series Logger Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 


+ Two heavy manipulator arms 
* One heavy (tree-felling) saw 
* One light (brush removing) saw 
* Probability projection computer, for assistance in de- 
termining how and when a given tree will land. 
s Extendible video sensor 
+ Emergency audio alarm, for use in the event of a felling 


lA—responding to a contract 
from the Greel Wood Logging Cor- 


the 

uve lech ted eter tere 
an arge 

arboreal growths "While the FLA. 
series AA Asa madestly well, it 
does not see wide usage; the log- 
_ ging operations on Pii 3 are gener- 
Py the only crews that use the 


ig fault for the lack of commer- 

cial success for the FLRA-series 

does not lie with Industrial Automa- 

ton; the IA design team created a 

droid that paN matched 
Unfortun 


Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: None 

Platt/35:1:51/Ryle These units break 
down so often that someone looking to make 
a little honest cash can try shipping replace- 
ments parts to Pii 3. Unfortunately, finding 
replacement parts can be tricky; IA doesn’t 
make a point of manufacturing for the FLR. 


Ransom/37:1:3:31/Hute The big prob- 
lem with the FLR is that Industrial Automa- 
ton actually made it too user friendly; FLRs 
take forever to program because the unit 
spends half of its time asking whether or not 
you really want it programmed that way. 
Frustrating and time consuming...not the 
best marketing concept. 


illustration By Johannes Huber 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECH 


$ 


-W 
apat) 


GY-I INFORMATION ANALYSIS DROID 


Model: Cybot Galactica GY- Series Information Analysis 
Unit 


Planetary systems 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D 


PERCEPTION 2D+1 

STRENGTH 1D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D+2 
Equipped With: 


* Arakyd data storage and collation software (adds +1D 
to all computer programming/repair rolls involving data 
research 


i) 
* Cybot Galactica multi-socket computer interface (al- 
lows access to most computer systems currently in 
operation in the Empire) 
s Humanoid body (two legs, two arms, head) 
* Cybot Galactica GY- data analysis software (+2D to all 
computer programming/repair rolis that involve the col- 
lation/analysis of data ) 
Move: 5, 
Size: 1 meter tall 
Cost: 7,500 credits 
Cybot Galactica’s GY- Information Analysis 
Unit was reserved for high-end corporations 
and learning facilities until the military took note 
of its abilities. The standard unit is capable of 
processing upwards of 500,000 data informa- 
second. This feature has been 
Lenence and ep techni- 


1 order customized modules 
directly from Cybot Galactica; ines ke ship- 
board GY-| units can store up to 30 hyperspace 
coordinates with the proper module. These 


oaiae features can be pur- 

for 1 of an nahi are price ort 
can be installed in 24 hours with an Easy 
computer programming/repair roll. : 


Prof, Rivaz/36:8: 7:01/Reie the 
intelligence gathering capacity of these 


droids, they also make excellent analyzers of 
physical phenomena. The science depart- 
ment of the Imperial Academy on Raithal has 
used several of these droids for years with 
great success. 


Garnet /36:9:3:22/Rode A couple of years 
ago, | ran several GY-Is to the University at 
Rudrig {out in the Tion}. These guys scrape 
together a fair amount of credits from 
donations and tuition and are actually willing 
to pay a modest markup on educational 
materials. And it was kind of nice to make a 
Zest without getting shot at by Customs 
ips... 


Illustration By Johannes Huber 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


NOLOGY 
PEY 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


“HATCHLING” MAINTENANCE DROID 


Type: Roche zero-g maintenance droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 5D, blaster: welding tools 7D, dodge 4D 


Equipped With: 

* Repulsorlift/thruster package (allows movement in 
atmosphere with a flight ceiling of 10 meters, thruster 
package allows movement in space) 

* Six arms 

s Welding lasers (0.3 meter range, 8D damage) 

* Various repair appendages (fitted for specific mis- 
sions) 

* Broadband transmitter/receiver package 

* Repair database (adds +1D te all repair rolls to space- 
craft). 

Move: 6 (in atmosphere), 15 (in space) 

Size: 2 meters long 

Cost: 2,050 credits 


The Verpin at starship construc- 
tion and natives of an asteroid field—have re- 


Illustration By Johannes Huber 


quired droids to work in vacuum for decades. The 
“Hatchling” maintenance droid is the latest in a 
long series of such units, and perhaps the most 
versatile. The droid functions best in zero-g and 
typically serves as a repair unit in stardocks and 
deep-space shipyards. 

Availability: 2, F 

Personality Matrix: Simple 
K’l'aan/36:9:9:62/Roce Apparently, a 
Verpine consortium just set up shop on 
StarForge Station; there are around three 
dozen Hatchlings swarming around the re- 
pair bays these days. 
Rashh/37:5:4:07/Tate Since | started jock- 
eying a bulk freighter, | refitted five Hatchlings 
to serve as onboard repair and security 
units; by replacing one of the tool hardpoints 
with a high-powered blaster, | can send 
them out to scrape mynocks and other 
critters off my hull. A very cost-effective and 
versatile droid. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


LE REPAIR DROID 


Type: Cybot Galactica LE-series repair droid Barazzi/37:2:7:22/Liie | recently “ob- 
1D tained” a large shipment of these units from 
an Imperial supply depot. Anybody inter- 
Astrogation 2D+1, communications 3D, sensors 3D ested in purchasing some or all of these 
PERCEPTION 1D droids can contact me on Sullust. 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Capital starship repair 4D, computer programming/re- 
pair 5D, space transports repair 3D 
Equipped With: 
* Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head) 
e Visual/audial sensors (human range) 
* Vocabulator speech/sound system 
Move: 7 
Size: 1.7 meters tall 
Cost: 12,800 (new), 6,500 (used) 
The LE-series repair droids were an odd 
combination of the 3PO protocol units com- 
bined with the utility of an astromech...in 
theory. 
In practice, LEs are serviceable ship me- 
chanics, with more than enough communica- 
tive ability to effectively deal with organics. 
While the LE-series is not equipped with the 
same level of computer data exchange gear as 
an astromech, such droids are easily modified 
to suit individual needs. 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Complex 


Risol/36:5:5:89/Tate | modified the 
blazes out of my LE-series droid; it handles 
all my scheduling, bookkeeping and repair 
chores. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


M38 EXPLORER DROID 


Model; Les Tech M38 Explorer Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Planetary systems 4D+2, survival 4D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
‘Search 4D+2 
STRENGTH 5D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Equipped With: 
+ Seismic sensors (+1D to search for ground vibrations 
and to determine what the source of those vibrations 
might be) 
* Movement sensors (+1D to search to spot moving 
objects up to 500 meters away) 

* Electromagnetic sensors (allows droid to monitor elec- 


tromagnetic spectrum 

+ Dual photoreceptors (visual and infrared) 

* Radiation sensors (allows droid to determine radia- 
tion levels, paying particular attention to levels harm- 
ful to organic life-forms) 

* Heavy grasper arm (+1D to lifting) 

* Fine work manipulator arm (+1D to Dexterity or Tech- 
nical skills; used to gather samples) 


Size: 1.3 meters tall 


Cost: 13,000 credits (new), 5,500 credits (used) 


Explorers and scouts no longer need to risk 
their lives covering unknown territory where 
danger could possibly lurk. Les Tech has pro- 
duced the M38 Series Explorer Droid to m 
the more dangerous tasks the 


duties, lowing a scout to concentrate on 
analyzing data and mapping the terrain. 
Availability: 2, F 

Personality Matrix: Elementary 

Bynder/37:1:8:11 /Slue If you believe the 
promotional material on these things, you're 
a few cards short of a sabacc deck! I've 
been an Outer Rim scout for most of my life 
and the idea that a droid can handle “all 


initial exploration duties” is a joke. A friend of 
mine used an M38, once. He'd been 
planetside for all of a day when the droid— 
confused by too much sensor input—fell off 
a cliff and was destroyed. Some help. 


Noma/37:1:8:21/Core Maybe you're 
friend should read the instruction manual 
that comes with the M38. It warns users 
that the tread system requires alignment 
each time you send it out. Sounds like your 
buddy forgot to do that, causing the droid to 
overcompensate for control problems. My 
M38 has been terrific; with proper mainte- 
nance it takes a beating and does the job. 


Illustration By Johannes Huber 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


NR-5 MAINTENANCE DROID 


Model: Kalibac Industries NR-5 Maintenance Droid 


Computer programming/repair 4D, security 2D, space 
transports repair 3D 


* Visual photoreceptors (human range, infrared, ultra- 
let 


Kalibac Industries was heavily accused of 
of the WED Treadwell unit 

when it released the NR- 

Kalibac insists, however, that 


chief competitor: Industrial Automaton. The NR- 
5 is well equipped to handle minor to mid-sized 
airs on several classes of saradong ves- 
, and many have found homes with spacers 
that want the convenience of an astromech 
without the high cost. 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Simple 
Kraemr/33:4:3:08/Cele Be careful when 
purchasing an NR-5. A small company called 
“Tredwall” is marketing an NR knockoff that 
works for about ten hours before completely 
frying all of its circuits! 
Drev/33:9:2:11/Crie There's a wander- 
ing Tredwall sales rep—a Rodian who calls 
himself “Faddo"—who picks up gullible marks 
on the Vohai Unirail. He got me pretty good, 
and for some reason the law won't (or can’t) 
catch Faddo. Anybody else out there been 
suckered by this grubber? If so, meet me on 
Selonia in the next standard month; l'm 
planning a little party for this grifter. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
I: yy 


P2 ASTROMECH PROTOTYPE 


Model: Industrial Automaton Astromech Droid Proto- Then the blasted thing misunderstood a 
simple command and shut down my deflec- 
tors during a fight with some Imperial ships. 
| ended up spacing the little bundle of design 
flaws. If | ever find Fuller, he and | will have 
some words.... 


2D 
Space transports repair 5D 
With: 


* Three wheeled legs (one retractable) 

» Heavy grasper arm 

+ Three medium arms (retractable) 

+ Laser welder (5D damage, 0.5 meter range) 

s Video display screen 

* Buzzsaw (5D damage) 

+ Armored hull («1D to Strength when resisting damage) 
Move: 4, Wheels 

Size: 2.2 meters 

Cost: 2,500 (used) 

The P2 is a precursor to the R2 astromech 
droid. Pes are similar to R@s, except they 
are much larger. Pes have very simple computer- 
brains, and are typically very subservient. They 
are awkward, and tend to bump into nearby 
objects [which can prove awkward aboard com- 


bat vessels, particularly during battle). Pes can 
only communicate through their video screens or 

The P2 is extremely outdated and is no longer 
manufactured by IA; the success of the R-series 
Nag effectively ended the production run of the 


Availability: 3 

Personality Matrix: None 

Garnet /32:4:8:05/Game | picked up a P2 
| from Devon Fuller (who owed me money). He 

didn’t have the cash so he offered me the 
_ droid. Seemed like a good idea at the time. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


PG-5 GUNNERY DROID 


Model: industrial Automaton Gunnery Droid Prototype 
DEXTERITY 1D 


Capital ship gunnery 3D, capital ship shields 4D, commu- 
nications 3D, sensors 6D, starship gunnery 3D, starship 


Capital ship weapon repair 5D, computer programming/ 
repair 4D, starship weapon repair 5D 

Equipped With: 

* Three wheeled legs (one retractabie) 

* Heavy grasper arm 

+ Three medium arms (retractable) 

+ Laser welder (6D damage, 0.3 meter range) 

* Scomp-link (+1D to all computer programming/repair 
rolis when linked to a computer system) 


oe tier ele 
was an attempt to i ital ship 
ee ee ese 
-= around an astromech chassis, the PG-5 has 


were produced 

by local militia forces 

reaus. 

Availability: 3 : 

F'rod/35:8:2:09/Tyde if you can find a PG- 


5, it is worth owners 


hate the units because of their sluggish 
speed, bulky size and inadequate program- 


ming. However, if you are willing to ‘i 
Tada 


the time and credits on upgrading 

a PG-5 can be a smuggler’s best friend. | 
increased a PG-5s SkillWare package and 
now it can handle all the duties normally 
assigned to an R2 unit. In addition, | added 
high-end targeting and shield operation Skill- 
Ware and a pretty sophisticated Personality 
Matrix. (My droid is probably a better con 
artist than | am now.) Since | managed to 
pick the droid up dirt cheap in a military 
surplus auction, | actually spent less on it 
than a stock R2 unit. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


y 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


ED 


DRO! | 
' 


R2 ASTROMECH DROID 


Model: Industrial Automaton R2 Astromech Droid 
1D 


Computer programming/repair 4D, starfighter repair 5D 
Equipped With: 

+ Three wheeled legs (one retractable) 

* Retractable heavy grasper arm (+1D to lifting, maximum 
2D 


* Retractable fine work grasper arm 

* Extendible 0.3 meter long video sensor (360-degree 
rotation) 

* Small electric are welder (1D to 5D damage, 0.3 meter 
range) 

+ Video display screen 

* Holographic projector/recorder 

* Fire extinguisher 

* Acoustic signaler 

* Small (20 cm. By 8 cm) internal cargo area 

* Some additional tools and equipment 

Special Abilities: 

Astromech droids, if acting in copilot capacity, may 
attempt starship repairs while in flight. 

Move: 5, Wheels 

Size: 1 meter tall 

Cost: 4,525 credits 


The R2 unit is easily the most successful 
astromech droid ever manufactured and has 
spawned hundreds of imitations and variants 
across the galaxy. R2s can hold up to 10 
hyperspace jump coordinates in memory. This 
versatile droid has many features including a 
sensor package, an electro probe and even a 
three standard year warranty. Of the earlier 
droids in the R-series astromech line, the Re is 
the only one Industrial Automaton still produces 
on a galactic scale. 

Availability: | 

Personality Matrix: Elementary 
Nikambree/36:4:4:00/Cele What more 
can anyone say about the R-series droids? 
They are extremely versatile and are de- 
signed with upgrades in mind. My Re unit 


has so many attachments and modifications 
| doubt the design techs at IA would even 
recognize it as one of their own (chuckle). 


Gunman/36:7:2:02/Sule Here's a con- 
figuration for an R2 unit that my team has 
used from time to time: a really powerful 
repulsorlift, a high-grade targeting package, 
internal comlink (with data compression and 
a holorecorder). We can deploy a bunch of 
these modified R2s into a combat zone and 
they can transmit back a three-dimensional 
model of the area. The only problem is that 
they are pretty easy to target and destroy. 
If you try this, expect at least 80 percent 
losses of your surveillance droids, Still, this 
setup is unorthodox and unexpected and 
can provide you with a tactical edge...if 
you've got the credits to burn. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


is 


R5 ASTROMECH DROID 


Model: industrial Automaton R5 Astromech Droid Bray!/36:2:7:09/Dane One of the major — 
flaws with the R5 is its personality matrix — 
(which IA cut corners on during the design 
stage). Frequent memory wipes and regu- 
! lar eines ssi will keep them gdek ai 
prevent them from in know 
Computer programming/repair 4D, space transports re- this mei ord —teve. Wee woes 
Equipped Whit: gets kind of grumpy if I'm late giving him an 
* Three wheeled legs (one retractable) oil bath. 
lee i heavy grasper arm (+ 1D to lifting, maximum 
. PERIA fine worker arm 
e Smali circular saw (4D damage, 0.3 meter range) 
* Acoustic signaler 
* Holographic projector/recorder 
* Fire extinguisher 
Move: 5 
Size: | meter tall 
Cost: 2,000 credits 
The RS was the cheapest of the R-unit 
series manufactured by Industrial Auto- 
mation. The line was quickly discontinued 
due to poor quality and poor sales, It was 
also a failure as a useful astromech droid, 
as it only holds one set of hyperspace 
coordinates in its memory at a time. RSs 
can be found throughout the Outer Rim 
Territories. 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Simple 
Croww/35:4:7:02/Bese Despite 
the bad press that these droids got, 
they are somewhat useful. One plus is 
that—since virtually everyone in the 
galaxy thinks that R5s are junk—you 
can usually purchase them at a dis- 
count. If you are buying in bulk, most 
dealers will cut you an even better 
price, mostly because they are happy 
to be rid of the units. From there, it is 
simple enough to make a run out to 
the Tion or the Centrality and sell 
them to the locals and still pocket a 
small profit. 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
IY 


V6 PILOT DROID 


Type: Industrial Automaton V6 Pilot Droid 
DEXTERITY ID 


KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Planetary systems 4D 
MECHANICAL 1D 


Astrogation 4D, space transports 5D+2 
PERCEPTION 1D 


Computer programming/repair 3D, space transports re- 
pair 3D, starfighter repair 3D 
With: 


* Three wheeled legs (one retractable) 

* One retractable arm 

* One visual sensor (human range) 

* Starship interface jack 

s Video display screen 

+ Memory for five pre-programmed hyperspace jumps 
Move: 5 

Size: 1 meter tall 

Cost: 17,800 (new), 12,000 (used) 

The V6 pilot droid is the latest in the V-series 
astromech line fram Industrial Automaton. The 
initial V1—which was modestly successful—was 
designed as a simple pilot, capable of controlling 
small vessels (such as freighters or tugs) for 
short distances. The V6, the next production 
model in the series to become available, takes 
the design one step further. The V6 can store 
more jump coordinates that a standard astro- 
mech and shows more promise as a ship pilot... .at 
least, in non-combat situations. 

Personality Matrix: Complex 

Availability; 2, F 
“KesselRunner”/37:5:5:09/Kese | can't 
imaging letting a droid pilot my ship. These 
things might be useful for short cargo hops 
or moving bulk freighters into parking orbits, 
but | just can't fathom why both the Alliance 
and the Empire use these things during a 
shooting war. 

Kilburn/37:8:1:11/Bybe Don't ever trust 
a pilot droid during a combat situation. They 
panic, and you generally end up in worse 


trouble than if you were flying the ship 
yourself. 

W’'Siri/37:9:2:19/Core Most systems 
require extremely expensive flight permits to 
allow a droid to pilot a space vessel; these 
permits invariably require the owner to sub- 
mit genetic, retinal and ship registry infor- 
mation prior to approval. Not a great idea, 
if you want to stay out of official records. 


Illustration By Johannes Huber 


SECOND DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


3P0 PROTOCOL DROID 


Model: Cybot Galactica 3P0 Human-Cyborg Relations 


* Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, torso, head) 

+ Two photoreceptors and two auditory receptors (Hu- 
man range) 

+ Vocabulator speech/sound system 

+ Verbobrain 

¢ TranLang I Communications module with over seven 
million languages 


Special Skills: 

The droid’s vocabulator speech/sound system makes 
the droid capable of reproducing virtually any sound it 
hears z is programmed to reproduce. 

Move: 


Size: 1.7 meters 

The Cybot Galactica 3PO series is among the 
most successful line of protocol droids ever 
developed. 3P0 units are humanoid in shape and 
are generally jab ha for subservient, ser- 
vice-oriented rol 


Protocol droids are typically used for etiquette 
training and translation, often by diplomats, 
corporate execs, traders or wealthy nobles. 
Availability: 1 
Personality Matrix: Complex 
Torbin/33:3:7:08/Sule One of the nice 
things about SPO droids is that they are 
unobtrusive; no one pays much attention to 
them since they seem to be 
With the addition of a small (and wel-hidden) 
storage compartment and a creatively pro- 


grammed personality matrix, a SPO unt can : 


be an effective tool for smuggling weapons 
or spice once you're dirtside. 

Fuller/34:4:4:11/Spie You got that right! 
The Imperials followed me all over Port 
Jerrell to find my smuggling contact and 


ignored my protocol droid. While surveil- 
lance teams scrambled-around, following 
me to a bunch of decoy locations, my droid 
marched up to my contact, handed off a 
small load of ryll and pocketed the credit 
voucher. Worked like a charm. 
Toria/34:4:4:21 /Game Hey, Fuller, | think 
Roark Garnet is still looking for you. Some- 
thing about credits owed and a faulty astro- 
mech... 


illustration By Mike Manley 


THIRD DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
. 


C4LR LITIGATION DROID 


Model: Caldrahlsen Mechanicals C4LR Litigation Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Bureaucracy: Imperial administration 5D+2, bureaucracy: 
courtroom procedures 5D+2, cultures 4D+1, intimidation 
4D+2, law se ay 6D, scholar: Imperial law 6D+2 


Equipped With: 

+ Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) 

* Two visual and auditory sensors recorders (human 
range) 

* Holographic projector/recorder 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 

* AX-02 verbobrain 

* Litigation module: Compilation of Imperial legal prece- 
dents and special case histories pertaining to a specific 
facet of Imperial Law. Specializations can include: civil 
law, taxation law, military jurisprudence, and so on. One 
base module is installed with each droid. Up to four 
additional modules can be installed at any one time. 
Special Abilities: 

Perfect memory: Litigation droids keep a permanent record 
of all courtroom proceedings as well as data transcripts 
and holovids of material entered Into evidence in a court 
of law. It can replay all relevant courtroom conversations 
verbatim, as well as provide hardcopy of all relevant 
printed material. 

Honesty: A litigation droid is prevented by its program- 
ming from lying, exaggerating or misrepresenting acts 
that might otherwise benefit its client/master. 

Move: 8 

Size: 1.6 meters 

Cost: 3,000-10,000 (varies depending on specific pro- 
gramming requirements; up to 4 litigation expertise mod- 
ules can be installed at 2,000 credits per module). 


The C4LR is one of the few types of droids that 
are accepted and accredited within the Imperial 
legal system; such units have proven so reliable 
that the Imperial Inquisition has recently adopted 
the C4LR into service. 

Litigation droids have flawless memories, re- 
cording all court proceedings for later playback, 
and it is this memory that led to the C4LR's ad 
campaign: “A litigation droid may be your best 
defense!” 


der if that memory capacity can be retrofit- 
ted to other systems. I've heard of smug- 
glers using additional droid “brains” to up- 
grade nav computers and damage control 
systems. | wonder if a C4LR can act as a 
massive nav data reservoir? 


Siri/36:3:1:01/Core Not a bad idea. Of 
course, it will seem like a terrible idea when 
your new nav backup decides it is against the 
law to flee Imperial pursuit and refuses to 
give you jump coordinates when you have a 
hold full of ryll. 


Wustration By Christina Waid 


THIRD DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


MSE-6 UTILITY DROID 


Model: Rebaxan Colmuni MSE-6 
DEXTERITY 2D 


With: 
s Electro-photoreceptor 
« Auditory sensor 
* Holocam 
* Treads 
* Retractable heavy manipulator (+2D to lifting) 
* Retractable fine manipulator (+1D te lifting) 
* One skill matrix programmed with one of the following 
skills: bureaucracy 3D, sensors 3D, hide 3D, search 4D, 
armor repair 3D, blaster repair 3D, capital ship repair 4D, 
capital ship weapons repair 3D, computer programming/ 
repair 3D, droid programming 3D, droid repair 3D, security 
3D, starfighter repair 3D 
Move: 5 
Size: 0.3 meters 
Cost: 350 credits standard 


The Rebaxan Colmuni MSE-6 was introduced 
as a low-cost commercial droid by the now- 
defunct Chadra Fan company. The Chadra Fan 
modeled their droid after a common pet animal 
from their homeworld; unfortunately, the MSE-6 
was an utter failure on the open market because 
it reminded most everyone eise of a scavenger 
rodent, 

Each “mouse droid” is equipped with one 
modular circuit matrix, programmed with a single 
skill, Such matrices are cheap, compact and 
easy to install, allowing MSE-6 units to perform 
one task, switch matrices, and move on to a new 
task. 

Availability: 1 
Personality Matrix: None 


Meynin/35:5:8:09/Bese It is actually pretty 
surprising just how versatile these things 
are. The last time | blew through Rampa and 


got shot up {those patrol gunners keep 
getting better and better), | brought my 
freighter to an outlaw tech. The tech’s 
operation was pretty small, consisting of 
300 or more MSE-6s and a couple of 
organics (mostly muscle). He had built a 
pretty elaborate ramp/scaffolding system 
that he installed on my ship. The scaffolding 
took a few hours to set up; within minutes of 
its completion, hundreds of MSEs—each 
programmed to repair specific systems— 
were swarming over the hull. They did fair 
work, with minimal labor costs (and it was 
kind of fun to watch those little beggars 
zipping all over the hull). 


Ilustration By LFL 


THIRD DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
EED 


SE4 SERVANT DROID 


Model: Industrial Automaton SE4 Servant Droid shipping runs, and basically making tremen- 
TEE RD dous nuisances of Haner Given the 
Sarkans notorious protocol requirements— 
Culinary arts 4D, cultures 3D, home economics 4D, lan- which are not exactly conducive to trade and 
are equally annoying besides—it was a real 
pleasure to give the ranking Sarkan a present: 
the three most annoying SE4s from my hold. 


Equipped With: 

* Humanoid body (head, two arms, two legs) 
* Vocabulary speech system 

* Photoreceptors 

+ Auditory sensors 

Move: 7 

Size: 1.6. meters tall 

Cost: 2,600 (new), 1,300 (used) 


The SE4 servant droid is one of the oldest 
lines produced by Industrial Automaton. 
The SE4—similar to a protocol droid—was 
created with the performance of domestic 
chores in mind; cleaning, organizing and 
cooking techniques are hardwired directly 
into the SE4s centra! processor. 

SE4 units can be programmed with 
personality modules that help smooth the 
transition to new working environments: 
recipes, basic social protocol and standard 
methods of cleaning and maintenance are 
standard personality packages. 


Availability: 2 

Personality Matrix: Advanced 

Platt/35:4:6:09/Bybe The last time 

| made a run to Sarka, | was carrying 

a load of SE4s. Just for fun, | activated 

a couple of them, figuring the place Z D 
could do with some basic cleaning. The 

next thing | knew, these droids were illustration By Johannes Huber 
telling me when to eat, scheduling my 


THIRD DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


SIAK PROTOCOL DROID 


Model: Roche Siak-series Protocol Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 

Dodge 2D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Cultures 4D, cultures: human 5D, languages 5D 
MECHANICAL 1D 


PERCEPTION 2D 
Persuasion 3D 
STRENGTH 1D 


TECHNICAL 1D 
With: 
* Tranlang [V Communications module 
+ Two photoreceptors and two auditory receptors (hu- 
man range) 
* Languages database (+1D to languages) 
e Verpinoid body (head, torso, two arms, two legs) 
* Vocabulator 
Move: 6, Legs 
Size: 1.5 meters 
Cost: 3,500 (new), 1,200 (used) 

Still hoping to capitalize on the hurnan-cyborg 
relations market after the disappointing returns 
on the J9 droids, Roche Corporation went back 
to the datapad and drafted what would become 
the Siakseries Protocol droid. After careful 
thought, Roche hired human contractors from 
outside to assist in designing a chassis and 
personality matrix that would be more appealing 
to the human populace. They succeeded. 

The Siakseries droid provides consumers 
with a droid capable of keeping up in conversa- 
tion, translating several hundred languages, and 
even negotiating on its own from time to time. 
The final physical design of the droid provided 
users with a more humanoid [yet very Verpine} 
design, which proved to be what the market was 
looking for in a protocol unit. Siaks are still in 
production today, and can be seen readily in 
urban areas. 


Availability: 2 

Personality Matrix: Advanced 
Treidum/35:1:2:02/Bere | just ran a load 
of these things out to Elrood sector and was 
promptly jumped by some pirates. Anybody 
travelling with easy-to-fence cargo should 


steer clear of Derliyn until the Imps clear it 
out some. 


Platt /35:2:4:01 /Erie I've heard some ugly 
rumors that the Khuiumiin Survivors are the 
pirates running around Elrood sector. These 
guys are rough, so travel quietly...and carry 
a big turbolaser. 


THIRD DEGREE DROIDS 


XA-540 SECRETARY DROID 


Model: Opti-Prime XA-540 Personal Secretary Droid <<<ERROR: ID NOT UPLOADED>>>/ 
Wanted. Specialized team willing to crack 
into Opti-Prime design facility. High reward, 
high risk. Contact can be made at Bonadan 

port. Enter StarFlight Lounge and or- 
der an Elshandruu Pica Thundercioud, a 
pitcher of Lum and pay with CSA 
omnes amming 2 script. Comment on the weather to the 

Equip With: SRT bartender: “High cloud ceiling today, but the 

+ Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) landing wasn't too bumpy.” You will be con- 

* Two visual and auditory sensor recorders-Human range tacted. 

* Vocabulator speech sound/system 

* TranLang | Communication module 

* Business administration policies and procedures 

database 


Special Abilities: 

Loyalty Inhibitor. Hardwired programming inhibits 
this unit from disclosing any information classified 
as “business-sensitive” to unauthorized personnel. 
Attempts to reprogram this automated function will 
result in circuitry overload and burnout. 


Opti-Prime bills the XA-540 as “a unit 
capable of handling all your administrative 
needs quietly, competently and with un- 
swerving loyalty.” Arguably, this statement is 
as accurate as a manufacturer's ad copy can 
be: the XA-540 is undoubtedly one of the 
most successful business droids currently in 
production. 

The XA-540 is widely used throughout the 
Corporate Sector, though Industrial Automa- 
ton is rumored to be developing a “knockoff” 
design based on the schematics of the Opti- 
Prime unit. 

Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Advanced 


THIRD DEGREE DROIDS 


BT-16 PERIMETER SECURITY DROID 


Model: Arakyd BT-16 Perimeter Security Droid 
DEXTERITY 4D 

Blaster 5D+1, dodge 5D+1, grenade 5D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Languages 3D+1, law-enforcement 4D+2, survival 3D+1 


Climbing 2D+1, swimming 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D+2, security 3D+1 
With: 


* Video sensor 

* Six leg locomotion 

* Sensor package: Carbantl motion sensor, Fabritech 
seismic sensor (+1D to search) 

* Imperial standard comlink 

« Arakyd vocabulator (speaks droid languages only) 

* TranLang I communication module (+1D to languages) 
+ Armor (+2D to Strength vs, physical and energy attacks) 
* Taim & Bak Repeating blaster (6D, 2-10/25/50, fire arc: 


Cost: 4,100 credits 


The BT-16 perimeter droid is famed for its 
reliability. The “arachnid” design allows for great 


illustration By Johannes Huber 


@ae ee eee 
| 


stability when the unit is in motion, and the heavy 
armor plating makes the droid extremely resis- 
tant to both physical and energy damage. 

The BT-16 sensor package is quite advanced 
(a Fabritech seismic reader and a Carbanti 
motion detector are standard components}. 
These detectors are typically keyed to sense 
small creatures and prevent them from harming 
farmland, hydroponic gardens or other such 
areas. (Consequently, the BT-16 is a favorite of 
farmers, who must remain ever-vigilant against 
“varmint” incursions.) 
Availability: 2, F 
Personality Matrix: None 
Jarik/34:4:2:02/Stae Any smugglers in- 
terested in a bit of gunrunning: | need some 
kind of military-grade missile rack (prefer- 
ably concussion missiles, but high-incendi- 
ary payloads are acceptable). A client with 
more money than sense wants to upgun his 
BT-16s for perimeter security around his 
manor house. No rebuilts or factory sec- 
onds, please. Contact Jarik at StarForge 
Station. 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


DRO! s 
re 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


GX SECURITY DROID 


Model: Aro-GX Security Droid 
DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 6D, dodge 8D, running 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Search 4D+2 


Computer programming/repair 3D+2, droid repair 4D, 
security 5D 

Equipped With: 

¢ Body armor: +3D STR to all locations 

* Wrist blasters (3D damage, range: 3-10/30/100) 

* Two auto-balance legs 

* Two arms 

Move: 10 

Size: 1.8 meters 

Cost: 9,000 credits (military/government use only) 


The Aro-GX security droid was originally con- 
ceived of as competition for the various security 
droids produced by Arakyd and Cybot Galactica. 
The GX is a formidable piece of hardware, with 
targeting systems that are comparable with 
most top-end military units. 

Shortly after the series was introduced to the 
consumer market, the Empire clamped down on 
manufacturers of droids for military applications 
and the Aro-GX was deemed as “too lethal for 
commercial sale” (despite the underpowered 
weaponry that the units were equipped with). 
This decision was reinforced when a GX—repro- 
grammed by a criminal in the Corellian system— 
nearly assassinated the Diktat. The bad press 
created by the incident effectively wiped out the 
manufacturer (Aro) and led to a surplus of GX 
droids available on the Black Market. 
Availability: 3, X 
Personality Matrix: Advanced 


Siri/36:4:8:08/Core These things have 
been banned from the Corellian system; 
anybody caught transporting an Aro-GX is 
looking at some serious time in prison. 
CorSec is still smarting from the attempted 


assassination on the Diktat and refuse to 
look bad again. 
“Corewatch"/37:2:3:11/Rhie Despite the 
Empire’s prohibition of the Aro-GX, a num- 
ber of high Imperial officials (Moffs, Admi- 
rals, High Admirals) have upgunned ver- 
sions of these droids. | know for a fact that 
most of the high officials along the Hydian 
Way have dozens of GXs providing them with 
additional security. 


nd 


E finns 


=m 
iN s 


as 


R 


a 
E illustration By Thomas Woo 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


IG COMBAT PROTOTYPE 


Type: Holowan Mechanicals [G-series assassin droid 
DEXTERITY 4D 


Blaster 6D, dodge 6D, energy weapons: sonic stunner 
5D+2, flamethrower 5D, grenade 6D, missile weapons 6D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Languages 3D+1, planetary systems 3D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 


Astrogation 4D+2, space transports 4D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D+1 


Search 7D, search: tracking 9D, sneak 4D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Lifting 6D 
1D+2 
Computer programming/repair 3D, droid programming 
3D, droid repair 3D 
Equipped With: 
+ Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head) 
* Broad-band antenna (can intercept and decode most 
communications on standard frequencies) 
* Flamethrower (3D damage, range 10 meters, flame does 
3D damage each round until exti 
* Long-range sensor (+2D to search for objects 50-750 
meters away) 
* Motion sensor (+2D to search for moving objects up to 
400 meters away) 
* Sonic stunner (4D stun, range 10 meters) 
+ Grenade launcher (5D) 
Move: 13 
Size: 2 meters tall 
Cost: 1,500,000 credits (Black Market only) 
Equipment: Blaster rifle (5D) 

The IG-series combat prototype was one of 
the deadliest droid models ever constructed, a 
fact the Holowan Mechanicals design team 
discovered; when the initial IG-series droids 
were activated, they went on a rampage, killing 
everyone in the room. Precisely why the HM 
team was developing such a powerful droid is 
not known; the original records have been 
seized by the Empire (though rumors abound 
that the project was an early attempt by the 
Imperial military to construct mechanized com- 
bat troops). The IG design has not been mass 
produced, and only a handful of prototypes are 
known to have survived; still, given the murky 
past of the |G-series, other prototypes may exist 
(possibly earlier models). 


Availability: 3, X 
Personality Matrix: Complex 


X $ illustration By Johannes Huber 


Javin/35:6: lage I've learned that 
Klaggus Purgato, one of the main design 
techs of the |G-series is still alive and in 
hiding. From what I've heard, he believes 
that the IGs were intentionally programmed 
to kill the designers by an outside agency 
(probably the Empire). : 
Pog/36:3:1:13/Tra* Yeah, right. | know 
all about “classified sources.” For those 
of you who don’t know, good al’ Javin is a 
regular conspiracy buff. To hear him tell it, 
everything is a sinister plot by the Empire. 
Hey, Javin, nobody has ever proven that 
Purgato was alive, or that he was a Holowan 
Mechanicals . And if {yes, | said ne 
the Empire was behind the IG ‘oe 
would you want to mess with the 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


ROW 


K4 SECURITY DROID 


Model: Rim Securities’ K4 Security Droid Callin/35:4:7:04/Bybe Hey, Fuller! | here 

Boke AeA tonnes A ol’ Roark Garnet is looking for you. Some- 

KNOWLEDGE ID thing about you being a slimy space slug with 
questionable social skills... 


Fuller/36:0:0:25/Else Aw, Roark never 
could take a joke. 


Equipped With: 
* Two auto-balance legs 
* Two arms 
* Body armor (+2D Strength to resist damage) 
* Internal blaster rifle (5D, 5-30/100/200) 
Move: 11 
Size: 1.6 meters tall 
Cost: 7,500 

The Rim Securities’ K4 unit is a popular model 
of defense droid, particularly in the Outer Rim 
Territories, where the K4 is manufactured, Most 
often found in the service of private corporations, 
local governments (and even crimelords), the K4 
is a solid, dependable droid. 
Availability: 2, R 
Personality Matrix: Elementary 
Callin/34:4:1:09/Ess* The K4 is a solid 
design, though I've noticed that the target- 
ing package’s accuracy decreases when the 
droid moves too quickly, Given how fast the 
K4 can move, that is a weakness that can be 
exploited. 


Gunman/35:3:2:14/Bote Actually, most 
K4s have a minor targeting glitch when they 
move quickly, unless the droid’s owner regu- 
larly aligns and cleans the blaster rifle hous- 
ing and the gyros in the auto-balance legs. 
The targeting isn't really off; the legs are 
actually moving out of synch with the sen- 
sors. If the droid is well maintained, you may 
end up in trouble. 


Fuller/35:3:9:21 /Else A well-placed blaster 
shot can knock the blaster (or the leg gyros) 
out of alignment pretty easily, though. 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


s us 


LE-VO LAW ENFORCEMENT DROID 


Model: Rseikharhl LE-VO Law Enforcement Droid 
DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 5D, dodge 3D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+ 


2 
Alien species 3D, bureaucracy 3D, intimidation 4D, law 
enforcement 6D, streetwise 4D 


MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift mg agg 3D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Con 2D+2, command 3D+2, investigation 4D+2, persua- 
sion 2D, search 3D 

STRENGTH 3D 


TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipped With: 

* Two auto-balance legs 

* Swivel torso 

* Body armor: +2D physical and energy to all locations 
+ Two blaster rifles (5D damage, normally set to stun) 
Move: 8 (walking)/12 (running) 

Size: 2.4 meters tall 

Cost: 9,000 (new) 

The LE-VO security unit was originally devel- 
oped by the rather technologically oriented 
Rseikharhis {a species from Rseik sector, near 
the Minos Cluster). The LE-VOs are a major 
component of the Rseikharhis sector-wide law 
enforcement apparatus and have been in service 
for many years with a near-flawless operational 
record 


Despite a decade of law-enforcement activi- 
ties, LE-VOs have been responsible for more than 
22,000 arrests with absolutely no fatalities. 
Because of the LE-VOs restraint—it is almost 
unheard of for a LE-VO to fire its blaster rifle to 
kill—the Empire has allowed the Rseikharhis to 
a using these exceptionally well-designed 


Availability: 2, R 
Personality Matrix: Advanced 
Ransom/35:2:0:17/Rode Y'know, it is 
almost a pleasure to confront one of these 
droids: they never shoot to kill. 
Colmar/35:3:9:21/Peme Maybe not, but 
they don't mind shooting on stun, and they 
are extremely accurate. 


Nikambree/35:4:1:27/Chae True, very 

true. On some Outer Rim worlds, LE-VOs act 

as local constabulary. I've seen them fitted 

with Stohklitype apparatus, capture nets 

shock sticks, and all sorts of other non-lethal 

combat gear. Despite their (dare | say it) 
nt demeanor, these things are all 

siness. 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


RM-2020 ESPIONAGE DROID 


LL ny a RM-2020 Espionage Droid men in particular—have had their ‘2020s 
Blaster 4D, dodge 6D, melee combat 3D+1 confiscated by the Empire. 

KNOWLEDGE 3D "KesselRunner”/35:5:7:10/Kese On are- 
MECHANICAL 2D lated note, | hear that Churhee’s Riflemen 
crus hes poeple are looking for some new RM-2020s... 
Investigation 6D, search 5D 

STRENGTH 4D 


+ Espionage module 
* Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head) 
* Information recording/coded broadcast system 


that allows the droid to engage in sabotage 
and infiltration missions into enemy camps, 
sowing confusion that can provide an at- 
tacker with a substantial edge in combat. 

Availability: 2, R 
Personality Matrix: Simple 


Matto/34:9:1:23/Sule The RM-2020 


"espionage droid” into a literal kiling ma- 
chine. Several merc groups—Churhee's Rifle- 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


“STILETTO” pakei e 


Model: Arakyd Stiletto Security Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster: stun bolt 5D+2, dodge 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 


body 
* Light blaster cannon (4D stun damage, 0-10/20/40) 
* Reflective plate armor (+2D to Strength to resist dam- 
age) 
s NeuroSaav sensor suite (+1D to search) 
+ NeruoSaay biorecognition package (+2D to search if bio- 
scan readings of target are available; maximum range of 


Cost: 7,500 (military issue only) 

The Stiletto is another in the seemingly end- 
less series of droids produced for the Imperial 
military by Arakyd, The Stiletto—a tall, rod-ike 
droid that moves on an efficient repulsorlift 
platform—is typically issued as additional secu- 
rity for garrisons and installation in the Outer Rim 
Territories. (Higher-end units are reserved for 
bases in the Core.) 

The Stiletto has been out of production for 
roughly two decades, though many remain in 
service; Arakyd has announced plans to update 
the model for future sale to the Imperial Navy and 
has begun manufacturing parts to service the 
thousands of Stilettos still functioning. 
Availability: 3, X 
Personality Matrix: None 
Gunman/36:2:2:01/Hyle While the Sti- 
letto sees service primarily in the Outer Rim, 
some local governments in the Core Worlds 
still outfit law enforcement and security 
forces with them. They are fairly slow and 
easy to outrun, but they have a superior 
targeting package; it isn't terribly different 
from the targeting system of an Arakyd 
Viper. 


ivoheard thet hey added missie launchers, 
flame projectors and additional armor to 
them and use them during boarding actions. 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


ZQ INFANTRY DROID 


Type: Sienar Intelligence Systems ZQ Infantry Support 
Unit 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 5D, dodge 4D, melee weapons 4D, missile weap- 


Command 4D, hide 3D, search 4D 
STRENGTH 4D 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D 


Droid repair 3D 
Eq With: 
Repulsorlift engine 


+ Heavy blaster cannon (7D) 

+ Light blaster cannon (5D) 

+ Two photoreceptors 

+ Vocabulator 

+ Miniature concussion missile system (8D, 3-10/15/20 
meters, ammo; 10) 

+ Grasper arm 

Move: 11 

Size: 1 meter tall 

Cost: 8,350 credits 


Sienar Intelligence Sys- 
tems created this highly suc- 
cessful infantry support unit 
for the military use during the 
early days of the Empire. The 
droid is [to put it bluntly) 
deadly. The ZQs two main 
blasters anti-personnel mis- 
sile system are more than 
capable of neutralizing ar- 
mored combat troops. Both 
of the ZQ’s arms contain 
hardpoints for installing up to 
four more weapon systems, 
making the droid extremely 
flexible. Though the Empire 
denies it, many believe that 
ZQ's are still used on modern 
battlefields. 

Availability: 2, R 
Personality Matrix: Simple 


Quarlo/36:5:1:30/GaneDespite the 
Empire's claims, a number of ZQs still see 
service in the Outer Rim. The pacification of 
Hyrol Preen Beta (Portmoak sector) was 
accomplished quite handily by a combination 
of ZQs, Storm Commandos and regular line 
troops. 


Johin/36:7:5:19/Otte | heard that Hyrol 
Preen Beta was a Rebel base; that’s why the 
Imps came down so hard on the natives. 
They couldn't catch the Rebels so they made 
it impossible to stick around. 


Quarlo/36:7:9:31/Gane |t doesn't really 
matter. All | know is that some Storm 
Commando unit (I think they're called the 
“DeathWhispers” or something) has been 
assigned 20 or so ZQs which they are 
outfitting to serve their unique “needs.” 


FOURTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


ASP-7 


Model: Industrial Automaton ASP-7 Droid 
EXTERITY 1D 


Lifting 2D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipped With: 

* Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head, torso) 

¢ One photoreceptor 

s Two auditory receptors 

Story Factors: 

Basic Programming: Basic ASP-7 droids are programmed 
only for the most menial of tasks. They are often out of 
place in other settings where more specialized droids 
would be used, such as starship engineering bays, medical 
suites and battlefields. They can be upgraded with im- 
proved programming and more attachments and equip- 
ment at an additional cost. 

Restricted Vocabulary: The basic ASP-7 unit can only reply 
with the words “affirmative” or “negative,” despite any 
question asked or situation encountered. 

Move: 6 

Size: 1.6 meters tall 

Cost: 1,000 credits (stock, new), 300 to 3,000 credits (used/ 
modified) 


When Industrial Automaton released the ASP 
series, it was attempting to bring the thrill of 
owning a droid to the average citizen (without the 
high price associated with such ownership). This 
made the Asp a bit feeble in functionality; its limited 
intelligence allowed for the simplest tasks (such as 
cleaning, loading, operating simple machinery) 
and very little else. 

Despite its rather lackluster nce, the 
Asp has been one of the company's more success- 
ful lines. Consumers soon discovered the ease in 
upgrading the Asp. Many owners have installed 
more efficient logic processors, like the AA-1 
Verbobrain, and upgraded the Asp's limited speech 
capability with a more advanced vocabulator. 
Seldom will a "stock" Asp be encountered, unless 
it is on the showroom floor. 


Availability: 1 

Personality Matrix: Simple 
“WompRat”/35:2:1:09/Tate Lately, there 
seems to be a lot of these things running 


around Mos Eisley. | heard that the Prefect 
just bought a whole freightertoad of these 
things to clean up the high-traffic areas around 
the spaceport. 

Zeb/36:1:2:07/Bese These droids work 
very hard, but they don't seem that intelligent; 
they follow orders so literally that they can be 
easily misled. Still, they are easy to modify and 
are capable of performing most tasks. 


Gunman/36:2:9:11/Tra* Churhee’s Rifle- 
men use a bunch of ASPs for weapons 
maintenance and for basic manual labor in 
combat (such as hauling up reserve genera- 
tors and crates of power packs to forward 
areas). They are cheap enough to replace 
when they get shot up, and are single-minded 
enough to not mind charging into a heavy fire- 
zone. 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


EG-6 POWER DROID 


Model: Veril Line Systems EG-6 Power Droid 
DEXTERITY ID 


TECHNICAL 3D 
Machinery repair 5D, repulsorlift repair 4D+1, systems 
diagnosis 5D 


eee Wi 


. locomotion 

* Ultra-fine manipulator (+1D to Technical skills) 

+ System diagnosis infrared receptor, 
sonar, X-ray and spectrometer equipment (+1D to sys- 
tems diagnosis 

e Cybot acoustic signaler (droid and computer 
languages; EG-6 units can not speak Basic or 

other common languages) 

. Armored housing (+2D to Strength) 


The EG-6 was designed with low-level 
stardocks and drop-point flights, where 
standardized refueling centers were not 
available in mind. The EG-6 is capable of 
reenergizing the power cells of a large 
vehicle (Walker scale) in one standard 
day. After this, the droid requires direct 
attachment to an energy reservoir to 
recharge its containment cells. The EG- 
6 always conserves enough power to 
maintain its own functionality. 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: None 
Drev/36:1:7:09/Tile While there 
is no denying that power droids are 
useful, they are also, well...stupid. | 
saw a bunch of children tell one to 


walk off a balcony. It did. baie EREA 
though.) 

C’bal/36:9:2:92/Esse I've heard that the 
power droid's inherent “susceptibility to sug- _ 
gestion” can have sinister results. | was ' 
nearby when a Hutt crimelord strapped a 
bunch of detonite on a droid and 
ordered it to walk off a nearby catwalk. The 
droid complied, falling something like 15 
stories before it crashed into a rival criminals 

floater that was parked below, The resultant 
explosion was,..impressive. 


rT 


=- 
Illustration By Johannes Huber 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


“ELEGANCE” MESSAGE DROID 


Craft: Industrial Automaton “Elegance” Message Droid 
Model: Message drone 

Scale: Starfighter 

Length: 9 meters 

Crew: None (fully automated droid brain with astrogation 
5D) 

Cargo Capacity: 15 Kilograms 

Consumables: 3 weeks 


Hyperdrive Multiplier: x 1/3 (limited to 1 jump before 
replenishing fuel; maximum of 5 jumps before hyper- 
drive is destroyed by wear) 

Cost: 250,00 (new; no longer manufactured or readily 
available), 50,000 (to replenish fuel) 

Nav ni ec Limited to one jump 


Equipped With: 

* Self-destruct mechanism (600 meter blast radius (space 
range of less than 1), 9D damage) 

+ Antitampering safeguards. if proper recognition codes 
are not received by the droid within 4-10 minutes of 
sensor contact (can be modified by the sender to suit 
individual needs) the self-destruct mechanism is acti- 
vated. Completion ofthe self-destruct cycle takes | minute. 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


Before the creation of the HoloNet, most 
system-to-system communication was limited to 
couriers. Even after the HoloNet was imple- 
mented, system governments continued to use 
message drones to transfer secure information 
to and from every region of the known galaxy. 

Today, due to the heaw restrictions on HoloNet 
traffic, the message drone is making a come- 
back. Many NewsNet agencies have refitted 
industrial Automaton "Elegance" models, as well 
as others like it to travel from system to system, 

ing newsfeeds. 


Garnet /36:4:3:03/Liae | used to own a 
couple of these that | “liberated” from an 
Imperial depot out near Obas. They were 
pretty handy for setting up meetings with 
skittish smuggling clients because they are 
so secure. Besides, these days, only outly- 
ing Imperial garrisons appear to be issued 
Elegance droids. By cobbling together phony 
transponder codes (which was only moder- 
ately difficult), no one messed with them. 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


tP¥y 


F1 EXPLORATION DROID 


Model: Cybot Galactica F1 Exploration Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 


KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Survival 4D 


Communications 2D, sensors 5D 
PERCEPTION 1D 

Hide 2D, sneak 2D, search 3D 
STRENGTH 1D 

Lifting 2D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Security 2D 


° Four legs 

* Heavy grasper jaw designed for holding targets without 
causing crushing damage 

+ Two photoreceptors (human range) 

e Auditory sensors (human range) 

e Olfactory sensors 

* Motion sensor array (+1D to search for detecting move- 
ment, range 50 meters) 

* Communications link to a base-ship computer extend- 
ing from the rear of the body 

* Binary vocoder 


Cost: 2,750 credits standard 


Designed as a companion and protector for 
scouts who brave the vast 
regions of unknown space, 
the F1 piles a great deal of 
functionality into a tight 
package. With an excep- 
tional array of sensors, the 
F1’s primary mission pro- 
file is to prevent accidents 
by forewarning its master 
of approaching life forms or 
vehicles, If something does 
happen to its owner, how- 
ever, it possesses the knowl- 
edge to assist by pulling the 
organic out of harm's way 
and back to a waiting ship. 
Availability: 3 
Personality Matrix: Elementary 


Colmar/34:3:8:71 /Bybe Avoid run-ins with 
Horch and Garaint (Kheedar system); ap- 
parently—and this is (as usual) a rumor— 
the Tombat broke in and discovered that 
Garaint has reprogrammed and rebuilt the 
basic chassis of a half-dozen F1s to serve as 
heavily-armed bodyguards. And from what 
I've heard, these things are nasty. 


Zeb/35:7:2:03/Bote During one of my 
earliest scouting missions, | had a bunch of 
F1s with me and it was extremely effective. 
Most traditional scouting-types argue that 
there is no place for automata in explora- 
tion, but | disagree. By tasking my F1s with 
perimeter security, | could relax and spend 
more time analyzing recon data without 
worrying that some local beast was going to 
charge in and tear me or my ship up. 


a ka kako a Radin 
miiitit 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC 


I-C2 CONSTRUCTION DROID 


Type: Veril Line Systems Civil-Industrial |-C2 Droid 
DEXTERITY 0D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Ground vehicle operation: integral tread system 3D+2, 
sensors 3D+1 


Computer programming/repair 3D, general repair 10D, 
machinery repair 10D 
Equipped With: 
* Processing furnace (absorbs damaged structures and 
debris and disintegrates it, 10D walker-scale damage) 
+ Heavy-duty tread system 
» Multiple lifting/repair appendages 
* Photoreceptor/audio receiver (human range) 
Move: 7 
Size: 10 meters tall, 30 meters long 
Cost: 1,700,000 (new), 975,000 (used) 
Equipment: Multiple cleaning and repair tools 

The -C2 was designed by VLS as an alternative 
to the construction droids that 
lumber throughout Imperial 
Center. While the construc- 
tion droids on Coruscant are 
quite successful at perform- 
ing their duties, many pro- 
grammers and civil engineers 
complain of the units’ balky 
programming “hiccups.” 

The -Ce is a less-expensive 
version of the larger droids on 
Coruscant. The major differ- 
ences between the two droid 
types are the Ces smaller 
size and more sophisticated 
programming. Unlike the Im- 
perial construction droids, the 
C2 is more independent and 
self-reliant, capable of assess- 
ing a situation and initiating 
the necessary repairs without 
consulting a central planning 
office. 


Availability: 2, F 
Personality Matrix: Simple 


Bublin/35:9:1:43/Tele The |-Ce is used by 
local governments on lower-tech worlds in 
the Outer Rim Territories, | hear that VLS is 
setting trade concessions up with these 
lesser-developed planets. By giving the lo- 
cals a few of the -C2s, VLS can build 
factories and start signing up contract la- 
bor. 


Helk/36:7:4:21/Mrie interesting strategy. 
By setting up shop on sem+-primitive plan- 
ets, VLS gets to look like a technological 
benefactor to the natives while making an 
end-run around guild-based trade restric- 
tions. A cute trick. (At least, until the locals 
get tired of being exploited and start shoot- 
ing.) 


quagaan i 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


mperial F Troopers 

ing them. (Of course, the S9 has no combat — 

oho O Paaa A a hury AEE RATIA 

shot to pieces in a hurry, must have 
ee E ae eee kept the | is ti i up for a while). 


eae 
e Reinforced chassis (+1D energy, +2D physical) 
range) 


* Internal heavy generator (recharges one starfighter- 
scale vehicle per standard day) 

+ Heavy treads 

* Extendible power transfer cable (6 meters) 

Move: 4 


Size: 0.75 meters tall 
Availability: 2 
Cost: 4,000 credits 

After Veril Line had a limited 
success with their they chose to 
eee a ore ANANE cere ct The 
59 is the result, This power droid pos- 
sesses a higher energy efficiency than its 
smaller predecessor, allowing it to re- 
charge the power cells of a starship in the 
time the EG-6 series could recharge a 
landspeeder. The droid still must recharge 
its reserve energy cells before continuing 
its work, however the time it takes to do 
this is much shorter than that of the EG-6. 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Simple 
Hkaeli/35:9:2:32/Pyre The S9 is 
ideally suited for use on planets with 
rough terrain (like Tatooine or Generis); 
consequently, the Rebel Alliance is 
trying to purchase or capture as many 
of these droids as it can. ' > 
Polain/36:3:1:89/Svie | heard a eee Ores 
story about -a Rebel cell on Gat Oe 
Chrystac that armored a handful of 
S9s to withstand the planet's volatile 


LELEL 
ciiiiib 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
yy 


SCOUT SURVEY DROID 


Type: SoroSuub Wanderer Scout Survey Droid 
DEXTERITY 


3D 
Blaster: stun blaster 5D 
WLEDGE 0D 


Size: | meter diameter, 2 meters tall 
Cost: 17,000 (new), 8,000 (used) 

SoroSuub Wanderers have a distinctly arach- 
nid design that many find quite fearsome. The 
underside of the droid bristles with sensor appa- 
ratus and other equipment. A single photorecep- 
tor (which can rotate in a 360-degree arc) rest 
an top of the sphere. In addition, Wanderers are 
equipped with stun blasters (used to subdue and 

capture specimen creatures). 
Overall, a well designed and 
well made scouting droid. 

A 2 

Pereonality Matrix: None 
Zeb/36:4:8:00/Tore | 
used to have a Wanderer, 
but | didn’t keep it around for 
long. While there was no 
problem with the droid’s abil- 
ity lit is a superior per- 
former), | prefer units with 
more “personality” than it 
exhibited. (It made an ASP 
droid look like a brilliant con- 
versationalist.} In fact, | had 
major problems adding a 
higher-end personality ma- 
trix to the droid—it tended 


to ignore the new protocols and continue to 
act like the mindless little drone it was 
designed to be. 


Priggit /36:8:2:46/Bese Actually, the Wan- 
derer is very difficult to add a new personal- 
ity matrix to. When it was designed, it was 
given a fairly small processing capacity (es- 
pecially when compared to the amount of 
information it stores concerning medical 
and scouting procedures). In addition, the 
Wanderer’s scouting and medical 

are given priority in the processing sub- 
systems. It doesn’t matter how much new 
programming you add, until you get rid of the 
scouting and medical subroutines, the droid 
will behave pretty much the same as if it 
were stock. 


Garnet /36:9:6:31/Dele Hmm...with all 


that additional storage space, | wonder if you 
can hide data {like smuggling routes) in it? 


Illustration By Johannes Huber 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


TS-ARACH PEST CONTROL DROID 


Type: MerenData TS-Arach series Pest Control Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster: mounted 4D, dodge 3D, pesticide hose 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 


+ Smali blaster (3D, 2-5/10/20 meters, ammo: 5) 

+ Pesticide dispensers (4D) 

+ One photoreceptor (human range, plus micro-scale) 

+ Auditory receptors (one human range, one high-fre- 


+ Entomology database 
Move: 5 


Size: 0.3 meters wide 
Cost: 600 credits 


MerenData's TS-Arach series was developed 
specifically to deal with the common pests that 
plague crops across the galaxy. The small droid’s 
sole function is to patrol crops, hunting and 
destroying insects and other harmful lifeforms. 
= TS-Arach's combination of lifeform scanner 

database can determine if a 
own creature is in fact a detriment to whatever 


crop is being farmed. If the droid determines that 
the creature is nota threat, it will log the creature's 
appearance and continue its patrol, downloading 
the sighting to the farmer at the end of the shift. 
Availability: 1 

Personality Matrix: Simple 
Indigo/36:8:2:04/Clge TS units are in great 
demand on colony worlds in the Outer Rim. A 
shipper looking to make a nice, legitimate run 
with minimal risk can probably pick up a bunch 
of these and deliver them to some grateful 
colonists (at a healthy mark-up, of course). 


Zeb/36:9:1:12/Peme Actually, the data- 
base the TS is equipped with is handy on 
scouting missions. While | rarely need any 
cropland patrolled, | do need large areas of 
land scanned and mapped. An automap 
hookup patched into my ship's main sensor 
package is easy enough, and when the TS 
returns at the end of its shift, | have a detailed 
map of the area and holos of the local 
wildlife... .all without setting foot on the ground. 
(Plus | don't have to worry about atmosphere 
type or the weather...the TS seems capable 
of functioning in virtually any environment.) 


FIFTH DEGREE DROIDS 


By Drew Campbell and Eric S. Trautmann 


“We'll be sent to the spice mines of Kessel, smashed into who knows what!” 
I — See-Threepio 


Help yaur droid avpid this horrific fate! Fantastic Technology: Droids gives 
players ahd gamemagsters a detailed look at these fascinating machines, from 
the lowliest astromeths to the fiercest combat units. 


This 96-page roleplaying supplement features: 


¢ A complete droid construction system that allows player characters to 
build a droid from scratch. 


e A player’s guide/to droids, with tips on how to make these mechanical | 
constructs morg than the sum of their metal parts. | 

e Several scenari hooks geared to droid player characters. | | 

e The DataLog—downloaded from Cynabar’s illegal infonet—which 


contains game stats, descriptions and illustrations of dozens of the most 
intriguing and useful droid designs in the galaxy! 


From the glossy showroom models to the rusted, twisted hulks on the Black 
Market, Fantastic: Technology: Droids gives you all the information you will 
ever need to integrate these sophisticated devices into your Star Wars 
roleplaying camp#ign! 

j 
| 
i 


Puy) TARTARO 


q9 eve oe 


Sur es hoe ww EN I 


18874'40116! lg 


i 
®, TM & © 1997 g Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization, 


GAMES 


f 


" ; | fac = ni 


