Death Star Technical Companion 


by Bill Slavicsek 


“Fear will keep the local systems in line. 
Fear of this battle station.” 


— Grand Moff Tarkin 


It is a period of galactic civil war. On one 
side, a raglag collection of freedom fighters ` 
called the Rebel. Alliance. On the other, the 


terrible might of the Empire. The Rebels have 
won their second major victory, the Battle of Yavin. 
The fate of the Alliance was in the hands of a new: 
hero named Luke Skywalkér. The farm boy from Tatoo- 
ine made the one shot that destroyed the Empire s most 
fearsome weapon — the Death Star. 
The Death Star, an armored battle station · the sizc of a 
smallmoon, packed enough firepower to destroy entire рјап- · 
ets. It was the most visible sign of the limitless military resources ` 
of the Empire. Alliance researchers have uncovered many of the 
secrets of the most devastating technological construct in galactic ` 
history, and gathered it together in this one volume. The Death Star 
has been destroyed, but its legacy lives on. . 


=} ү -- 


Death Star Technical Companion 


Design: Bill Slavicsek • Development and Editing: Bill Smith 
Graphics: Stephen Crane, John Paul Lona * Maps and Diagrams: Rob 
Caswell, Stephen Crane, Cathleen Hunter, John Paul Lona 
Cover Art: Lucasfilm, Ltd. e Interior Art: Lucasfilm, Ltd., John Раш Lona 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter • Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran 
Editors: Greg Farshtey, Bill Smith, Ed Stark • Art Director: Stephen Crane 
Graphic Artists: Cathleen Hunter, John Раш Lona e Illustrator: Allen Nunis 
Production Manager: Steve Porpora * Sales Manager: Fitzroy Bonterre 
Sales Assistant: Maria Kammeier-Kean * Administrative Assistant: Jeff Dennis 
Special Projects Manager: Ron Seiden • Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill • Treasurer: Janet Riccio 


Published by 


WEN 


RD3 Вох 2345 | 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40008 


8, ™ and © 1991 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Death Star lechnical Companion: Introduction 


El Introduction 


Han Solo, at the helm of the Millennium Falcon, 
closed the distance between his craft and the 
escaping TIE fighter. "We'll be on top of him ina 
minute or two,” Solo informed his passengers. 

“He’s heading for that small moon,” Luke 
Skywalker declared. 

As they flew nearer, craters and mountains on 
the moon became visible. Yet there was some- 
thing odd about thein. The craters were far too 
regular in outline, the mountains far too vertical. 
There were canyons and valleys which appeared 
impossibly straight. The surface was much too 
regularized to be attributed to natural formation. 

"That's no moon," Ben Kenobi breathed softly. 
"That's a space station." 

"It can't be a space station,” Solo objected. 
“It’s too big. It can't be artificial ..." 

“I have a very bad feeling about this," Luke 
said. 


It was 1977, and movie audiences shared the 
first view of the awe inspiring Death Star battle 
station with LukeSkywalker, Han Solo, Ben Kenobi 
and Chewbacca. Throughout the film we learned 
afew keys facts about the Death Star. It was huge, 
cavernous within its armored shell, full of wind- 
ing corridors, bottomless shafts, and unending 
lines of deadly stormtroopers. Its surface, mean- 
while, was covered with mountainous towers, 
deep trenches, and gaping holes leading into 
giant hangar bays. But perhaps its most awe- 
some feature was its superlaser cannon, a weapon 
which destroyed the planet Alderaan with a single 
shot before our stunned senses could contem- 
plate such destructive force. No wonder Tarkin 
saw it as the cornerstone of his doctrine of fear. 

Before we could learn more about this techno- 
logical terror, Luke Skywalker fired the shot heard 
around the galaxy. The Death Star was destroyed. 
A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away, how- 
ever, select pieces of information survived. First, 
there were the technical read-outs stolen by 


Ва 
АВЕ 


Alliance spies and hidden within a simple 
astromech Droid — plans which laid the founda- 
tion for Skywalkcr's amazing shot. Sccond, there 
were Tarkin’s own journals, a few of which made 
their way into Alliance hands. Finally, there was 
testimony delivered by eyewitnesses — among 
them Admiral Ackbar (who once served as 
Tarkin’s slave) and the heroes of Yavin, who not 
only managed to escape from the belly of the 
beast, but played an integral role in its final 
destruction. 

These sources were pieced together by а spe- 
cial team of Alliance researchers in order to 
prepare Rebel forces for battle against other 
weapons in the Empire’s arsenal — the similar 
torpedo spheres, and the inevitable appearance 
of other Death Stars. This volume summarizes 
the final report to Alliance command. 


This Technical Companion 


No single volume, no matter how large, could 
hope to detail every meter of a craft the size and 
scope of the Death Star, and we won’t pretend 
that this book even comes close. It does, how- 
ever, provide enough about the battle station to 
give you a sense of its size and power. And it 
provides a variety of personalities and settings 
for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game. 

The Death Star was organized both by physi- 
cal location and function. Physically, it was sliced 
into 24 equal zones, each one running from the 
equator to a pole. Each zone was divided into a 
number of “city sprawls” that were complete 
communities. The city sprawls were dependent 
upon each other for many specialized services, 
but they also were sophisticated enough to pro- 
vide all essential services for themselves. 

The Death Star was also broken down into 
several sectors, which were responsible for pro- 
viding certain kinds of services to the city sprawls. 
Fach of these sectors — command, general, mili- 
tary, security, and service/technical — were rep- 
resented in each city sprawl. Atypical city sprawl 


— TA 
WA 


was dominated by the general sector, including 
troop barracks, mess halls, recreation facilities 
and endless corridors. However. each general 
sector would have at least a small detention area 
(security sector), a command center to relay 
information on to the zone's bridge (command 
sector), a turbolaser [ог defense (inilitary sec- 
tor), several maintenance areas and at least one 
shuttle hangar bay. 

In addition to the typical sprawls, each zone 
had several sprawls dedicated to detailed sector 
functions such as high-security detention areas, 
superlaser support sectors, or zone/sector com- 
mand, for example. These sprawls were not as 
common as the sprawls dominated by the gen- 
eral sector, but they were also responsible for 
the smooth operation of the battle station. 

This book describes each sector, and pro- 
vides information on the coordination of sectors 
within individual city sprawls and hangar bay 
arcas. Each sector description includes locatioii 
notes, maps oftypical and specialized areas within 
thesector, descriptions and scenario ideas, crew 
details and missions, and other important infor- 
mation. At the end of the book, we've collected all 
of the crew and Droid game statistics for easy 
reference. 

Keep in mind that the Empire is a master of 
modular technology design. While we may only 


detail a small section of the massive Death Star 


within these pages, areas with similar functions 
will be very similar in design. In other words, one 
hangar bay looks like any other hangar bay aboard 
the battle station. 

As a whole, this book should make a fine 
addition to the libraries of Star Wars fans every- 
where, and as an added bonus it includes much 
that can be incorporated into sessions of Star 
Wars: The Roleplaying Game. 


Using this Volume with Star 
Wars: The Roleplaying Game 


To players of the Star Wars roleplaying game, 
we can hear your questions already. How can we 
use this in our campaigns? Wasn't the first Death 
Star destroyed? Don’t Luke, Han and Lando de- 
stroy the second one over Endor’s moon? Well, 
yes. However, this book still has many applica- 
tions to Star Wars campaigns. 

The Empire has gone to great effort and ex- 
pense to develop the technology of the superlaser. 
It’s conceivable that this technology could easily 
be applied to other weapon systems. While the 
Death Star is certainly an overwhelming obstacle 
to throw at a group of players, the Imperial war 
machine would certainly not be adverse to scal- 


Death Star Technical Companion: Introduction 


ing down the superlaser technology, perhaps for 
use as part of a unique space platform. The 
gigantic Torpedo Spheres are based on the plans 
from the original Death Star, even though they 
are smaller and lack the energy generators to 
power a superlaser weapon. 

In addition to the physical presence of such a 
weapon, the mere threat of the appearance of a 
new weapon of this magnitude could provide the 
plot threads for several adventures. While Star 
Wars: A New Hope begins in media res (Latin for 
"iu tlie middle of things”), tlie upeuiug crawl 
points out that Rebel spies somehow stole the 
plans to the Death Star (we now know it was the 
mission that rescued Ackbar from Grand Moff 
Tarkin). 

In your campaign, it's very likely that the 
characters will hear about rumors of a new and 
powerful superlaser weapon and will be Ше ошу 
Rebels in a position to investigate. The charac- 
ters then have to be the crafty spies who are 
willing to die for the Alliance. Of course, there's 


Death Star Technical Companion: Introduction a — STAR 


ARS" 


also the possibility that the rumors have been 
planted by Imperial spies to root out Rebel 
sympathisers. 

Also, the Empire is known for its factory- 
stamped equipment. Every TIE is cast from the 
same mold, and sois every detention block. So, if 
you need an Imperial detention block or a com- 
mand bridge or even a turbolift cluster, just use 
the examples found in this book. Remember, 
though, that the Death Star has some of the best 
trained Imperial soldiers and technicians in the 
galaxy. If you use its detention block as a model 
for the prison camp on Ferros VI, you'll have to 
adjust game stats to match your view of that 
particular planet. They could have as highly pro- 
fessional wardens as the Death Star does, or they 
could have frontier types trying hard to follow 
the Imperial codes but falling far short of the 
mark. 

In other words, be creative and inventive. 
That's what Star Wars and roleplaying games are 
all about anyway. 


Death Star Technical Companion 


"Don't be too proud of this technological 
terror you've constructed." 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter One 


AR — 
АА 


ШИШ Chapter One 


A Brief History of the 


Death Star 


The following information is excerpted from the 
data journals of Grand Moff Tarkin, Imperial Gov- 
ernor of the Outer Rim Territories and the Imperial 
official in charge of the Death Star Project. This 
entry, with cosmetic revisions, so impressed Ет- 
peror Palpatine that Tarkin was named a Grand 
Moff and laid the foundation for the Tarkin Doc- 
trine, the policy that led to the creation of the Death 
Star and the Empevor's unending efforts to spread 
fear and terror throughout the galaxy. 


To: His Imperial Majesty, Emperor Palpatine 
From: Governor Tarkin, Seswenna Sector, Eriadu 
Regarding: Increasingthe security ofthe Empire 


Your Majesty: 

It has recently come to my attention that what 
had previously been the quiet grumbling of mal- 
contents on backwater worlds has become dissi- 
dence in more civilized systems. Your Majesty 
will forgive me if I am repeating foundless ru- 
mors, but І have heard there is even armed 
defiance in some sectors. 

Coupled with increased resistance to your 
plans trom hot-headed young senators, this situ- 
ation has given me pause to think about our long 
term security arrangements. I myself have been 
frustrated chasing pirate bands іп my sector, 
only to have them leap deep into a neighboring 
sector where my forces cannot follow without 
running into conflict with another Moff. If the 
scattered armed resistance should become orga- 
nized, it will doubtless follow the example of its 
criminal brethren. Granting any rebel group the 
advantage of elusiveness is foolhardy at best. At 
worst, it could lead to our destruction. 

Even the excellent pace with which His Maj- 
esty is increasing the size of the Imperial Fleet 
can scarcely hope to provide all-encompassing 
security should a significant number of planets 
decide to defy your New Order. We are years — 
perhaps decades — away froma force vast enough 
to secure every system and every world simulta- 
neously. 


Therefore, I present the following recommen- 
dations for your consideration: 


* To provide a swift, systematic response to 
rebellion as it appears and before it has time to 
entrench, I suggest the formation of Oversectors 
— sectors consisting of systems in which rebel- 
поп 18 newly born, or systems which maintain 
frequent contact with systems in chronic unrest. 
These Oversectors would be formed without 
regard to current sector boundaries. With the 
freedom to cross outdated political borders, 
Oversector forces would be able to respond to 
threats quickly, while they are still small and 
manageable. 

Liquidating a dozen small threats is easier 
than rooting out one well-established center of 
defiance Asan Oversectaris created only across 
problem sectors, they must be given a greater 
quantity of forces than a normal sector. Three 
Sector Groups should suffice. 


* Command of an Oversector should be given to 
a single individual who reports directly to His 
Majesty. This will bypass any delays caused by 
political opportunis ін your advisors. 

* Cannibalize existing holonet transceivers, 
modify them, and put them in the flagship of 
every Sector Group in an Oversector command. 
Place similar facilities within His Majesty's com- 
mand ship and within the Royal Palaces of Impe- 
rial City. This will enable forces to respond to 
threats almost as quickly as they are reported. 
Imperial forces will be able to coordinate to a 
degree impossible among an enemy whose fast- 
est means of communication is an ever changing 
rendezvous point somewhere in the galaxy. 


* Rule through the fear of force rather than 
through force itself. If we nse our strength wisely, 
we shall cow thousands of worlds with the ex- 
ample of a select few. These examples would 
need to be highly visible worlds, whose punish- 
ment would be further revealed through our 
control of information via the hyper media. 


— ТА Ps ——À— ———— Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter One 


* Your Majesty, it has long been my contention 
that your New Order needs one undeniable and 
overwhelming symbol to impress and, yes, 
frighten the masses. The average citizen has no 
grasp of numbers nor а hcad for calculation. I 
maintain that the effectiveness of the Star De- 
stroyer stems from not only its massive fire- 
power, but from its size. When citizens look at a 
Star Destroyer and then compare it to the craft 
which might be mustered to attack it, they have 
a tendency to dismiss such a notion as suicidal 
rathcr than approach the problem tactically. 

This natural state can be exploited to a far 
greater degree, as the average citizen deals in 
symbols, not rational analysis. If we present the 
galaxy with a weapon so powerful, so immense as 
to defy all conceivable opposition against it, a 
weapon invulnerable and invincible in battle, 
then that weapon shall become the symbol of the 
Empire. We need only a handful, perhaps as few 
asone,ofthese weapons to subjugateathousand 
thousand worlds. It must have force enough to 
dispatch an entire system, power enough to shat- 
ter planets. The fear such a weapon will inspire 
will be great enough for you to rule the galaxy 
unchallenged. What do you need with theSenate 
when you can give direct control of territories to 
your hand-picked regional governors? Sweep 
away the last remnants of the Old Republic and 
let fear keep the local systems in line — fear of 
our ultimate weapon. 


4 “4. 
A AU 


I am ready to begin work to implement these 
steps at your word. 


* de së 


To: Governor Moff Tarkin 

From: Imperial Advisor Ars Dangor, 
for the Emperor 

Regarding: The Tarkin Doctrine 


You have read correctly, valued servant. Ev- 
erything you havesuggested will beimplemented 
in a policy to be officially known as the Tarkin 
Doctrine. Rule through fear instead of through 
idealistic government agencies has a satisfying 
appeal to the Emperor. As such, the following 
title is bestowed upon you immediately, along 
with all relevant powers pertaining to such. 


* You are now Grand Moff Tarkin, the first of a 
new order of Impertal officials. 


* You have complete authority and control of 
Oversector Outer, which includes most of the 
sectors considered the Outer Rim Territories 
(see star map which follows). 


* You are to implement under extreme secrecy 
the design and construction of your ultimate tool 
of fear, code-named the Death Star Project. 


* You have command of four Sector Groups to 
nse to maintain the peace and to provide security 


for the Death Star Project. 


John Paul Lora 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter One mmmm—— STAR 


10 


The Етрегог is pleased, Grand Moff Tarkin. 
Do not disappoint him. 


[Star map omitted from source file — Alliance 
editor.] 


* ck ok 


Personal Data Journal Entry #461, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 

The Death Star Project is underway. With funds 
diverted from the departments of System Explo- 
ration and Public Works, [have gathered a virtual 
army of engineers, technicians and skilled labor- 
ers under the command of Imperial space station 
designer Bevel Lemelisk. Secrecy and security 
being of prime concern to the Emperor, espe- 
cially secrecy from the curious eyes of the Sen- 
ate, I have selected the planet Despayre in the 
Iloruz system as our construction sile. This sys- 
tem is far from any normal space routes, tucked 
into a lonely and desolate corner of the Outer 
Rim Territories. The penal colony on the planet 
is the only outpost in the system, and its inmates 
will make an excellent source of manual labor. 

In addition, today І am to meet with the two 
men who will serve as my advisurs aud Пешеп- 
ants during the construction and later aboard 
the finished battle station. As they have been 
chosen by the Emperor, I must assume that they 
are suitable for the difficult job ahead. 

Admiral Motti is to serve as my chief aide and 
protector. He will hàve direct command of the 
four Sector Groups assigned to ту jurisdiction. 
The man's record shows that he believes in 
strength, and only strength. Only power is reality 
to him, and power is typified by technology. I fear 
that he is nothing if not overrated. 

The second is a General Tagge. The man is 
considered a grand tactician and leader. While I 
am to oversee the station's construction aud 
implementation, Tagge will be responsible for 
the day-to-day defenses of the project, and later 
for the weapon itself. He is to make my visions 
become reality. His record lists him as reason- 
able, rational and stable; an excellent person to 
support a master tactician such as myself. 


ж RK k 


Personal Data Journal Entry #476, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


Meetings with Chief Designer Lemelisk con- 
tinue to proceed smoothly. The man is as good as 
his reputation, and he has an uncanny ability to 
turn my visions into working prototypes. He 
truly believes we can construct an artificial satel- 
lite the size of a small moon. Of course, much of 
the satellite will consist of housing for the giant 
power cells, engines, weapons systems and other 


ARS" 


machinery necessary to support living beings 
and actually move the sphere through space. 
Still, it will be huge! If the masses quake in fear at 
the mention of asingleStar Destroyer, how much 
more fear will such an engine of destruction as 
our Death Star inspire? 

My latest set of requests were met with ex- 
cited joy. Bevel loves the challenges that I have 
set before him, and each new solution he devises 
makes the man absolutely giddy. I share his 
enthusiasm. 

Ihave asked for the following specifications be 
included in the final design: 


* The Death Star must feature a single weapon of 
mass destruction. This wcapon must cmit en- 
ergy of such a degree as to rock a target planet to 
its very core. 


• In addition, the Death Star must include surface 
defenses rivaling that of the Imperial core worlds. 
Planetary shielding, surface-to-air turbolasers, 
360 degree sensor capability, powerful multi- 
directional tractor beams, and heavy cannons 
for use against capital class ships are not only 
necessary but vital to the design and mission of 
the battle station. 


* The Death Star not only needs to move through 
normal space, but it must have the capacity to 
travel through hyperspace or it is useless to ns 
While hyperspace speeds need not be great since 
a planet would not be able to evade this station, 
it would be pleasing to achieve a moderate 
liyperdrive multiplier. 


* Once operational, the Death Star must be self- 
sufficient. It must be ableto produce its own vital 
supplies and to keep itself and its carried craft iıı 
working order, as its mission may carry it far 
from Imperial stores for long periods of time. 


I await Chief Bevel's assurances that these 
design specifications will be met. 


kkk 


Personal Data Journal Entry #481, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


Chief Bevel has responded to my last set of 
design specifications with his usual speed and 
completeness. However, he has had to disap- 
point me in some areas, while in others he has 
outdistanced even my wildest hopes and dreams. 

He assures me that he can include a weapon he 
calls a “superlaser” into the final design. In fact, 
the entire sphere will be dedicated to the sup- 
port and maintenance of this single wcapon. Not 
only will it be able to rock a planet, Bevel claims 
that the superlaser will shatter worlds. Only 
asteroid ruins will remain after the weapon is 
trained upon a target. 


—STARLLI.. LL ——————————Á———-— Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter One 


However, to achieve such massive destruc- 
tive power, I must lose all but the most rudimen- 
tary shielding capabilities. Bevel assures methat 
the surface-to-air defenses will more than make 
up for the loss. 

Movingthespherewillbeaccomplishedthrough 
the use of massive ion sublight drives while in 
realspace, and through redundant hyperdrive en- 
gines for travel from system to system. Make no 
mistake, though. The Death Star will be slow. It will 
seem to crawl through the void between planets, 
andeven in hyperspace it will be no faster than the 
most ancient tramp freighter. Bevel believes that 
hecangetthe hyperdrive multiplier down to three, 
but he warns me that it could be as high as five or 
six. No matter. It is fitting that targets of this station 
have an exceptionally long period of time to fear 
their ultimate fate. 

Finally, he showed me plans to modify existing 
space station replication plants to create a sup- 
plies manufacturing center deep in the bowels о! 


the Death Star. The food will not be Imperial cui- 
sine, but it will suffice to keep the crew healthy and 
content. There will be room enough to store a 
better grade of food for the command contingent. 


ж kK * 


Personal Data Journal Entry #493, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


The frame is in place above the planet! Bevel 
and his team have outdone themselves! The battle 
station will be 120 kilometers in diameter when 
complete, and Tagge assures me that it will be 
finished ahead of schedule. He has requested 
another shipment of Wookiee slaves because of 
their stamina, strength, and ability to work with 
high technology. I have approved his request. 

With the shield projector on the planct provid- 
ing a secure environment around the frame, and 
with our other security measures, | see no snags 
that will cause delays. I am confident that the 


11 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter One m... ГДЕ 


12 


Death Star will be ready in time for the Fmperor’s 
impending announcement to disband the Senate. 


жхх 


Personal Data Journal Entry #501, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


I have just completed a tour of the construc- 
tion facilities, both on the planet and in orbit. The 
planet-bound plants are turning out components 
around the clock. It is amazing how much work 
can be squeezed out of the laborers. The task- 
Masters work them to the point ot exhaustion, 
then bring in the next shift to pick up where the 
previous group left off. I was inspired by the 
techniques the taskmasters employ to achieve 
such dedication. 

Chief Lemelisk has made use of many stan- 
dard Imperial designs in the Death Star. Not only 
will this practice make crew training that much 
easier, it also allows us to use factory-pressed 
parts wherever possible. Of course, even the 
most hasic system has been modified by Bevel 
and his team, but at least they are working from 
existing technology. If they had to design each 
component as a totally new innovation, the 
project would take decades to complete. As it is, 
we are pushing dangerously close to the 
Emperor's deadline. I will have to speak with the 
taskmasters ahout stepping up production in the 
months remaining. 

In orbit, | was treated to a tour of the Death 
Star. While it still is more frame and exposed guts 
than finished station, | could see the completed 
Death Star emerging from the metal skeleton. 
The size of it! envisioned it, and still lam amazed 
at the reality of it all It is like walking within the 
Caves of Corips, only instead of rock and soil 
pressing down upon you there is plastisteel and 
illuminated tubing. 1 watched as the work crew 
began to place the superlaser into the Death 
Star’s gaping maw. I toured the command cen- 
ters, and strolled down wide corridors. I cannot 
wait to stand upon the overbridge and feel the 
hum of the powerful engines. When that occurs, 
I will know that dreams can become real. 

When I boarded the shuttle back to my com- 
шапа ship, I did so with sadness. It is hard to 
leave the child that I have conceived behind 
while it is still in such a vulnerable and helpless 
state. | long for the day when my child shows its 
power to the galaxy. On that day, this proud 
father will smile as the galaxy trembles. 


kk k 


Personal Data Journal Entry #529, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


More reports of a growing rebellion come 
from a wide variety of sectors. I study these 


ARS 


reports with some trepidation, for 1 see a pattern 
developing that hints of more than a few coinci- 
dental and unorganized uprisings happening si- 
multaneously. I fear that the rumors of a central 
rebel government may be more than just spacer 
talk. Perhaps the unconfirmed reports of rebel 
support in the Senate are even true. There is no 
hidingthat Senators such as Mon Mothma, Harkon 
Dell and Leia Organa have voiced their displea- 
sure with the Emperor’s New Order. 

Still, I am not worried by these rumors of 
rebellion. In fact, | would welcome a rebellion! 
The Death Star will make the Empire invincible, 
and the destruction of rebels and malcontents is 
exactly what it has been commissioned for. ПооЕ 
forward to demonstrating its power for all the 
galaxy to see. 


kkk 


Personal Data Journal Entry #572, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


As we near the final stages of the battlestation’s 
construction, I have just received word that the 
Emperor is sending an old friend to "assist" me. 
Lord Darth Vader, who I have not seen or worked 
with since my days in the Emperor's court, is 
being sent to aid me in the development and 
testing of the Death Star's mission profile. І have 
no doubt of his good intentions. I also have no 
doubt that Vader is coming to serve as the 
Emperor's eyes as this important project draws 
to a close. 

While part of me is disturbed by this news, 
another part of me welcomes my old ally. Vader 
is a powerful force in the New Order, and my 
contacts in Imperial City assure me that his own 
influence and personal power grows with each 
passing day. With the Dark Lord at my side, the 
Death Star Project can do nothing but succeed. 


KK k 


Personal Data Journal Entry #574, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


Lord Vader has been here for only a few days, 
and already Admiral Motti and General Tagge are 
complaining. What would the two of them like me 
to do, ask the Dark Lord to kindly leave? They 
must be mad! Besides, it will do the two of them 
goodtofeela bit of fear. I could tell them that they 
have nothing to worry about as long as they do 
not cross Vader. While the Dark Lord does have 
ambitions, his longings are beyond the simple 
wants and understandings of men such as Motti 
and lagge. Perhaps they are even beyond my 
own visions and desires. Who can truly under- 
stand a man like Vader, a man trapped within an 
armored suit and compelled by а mysterious 
Force that is as elusive as it is powerful? 


= TD Rens Death! Star Technical Companion: Chapter One 


"WA 


But I digress. І must admit that I find the 
interplay between Motti and Vader amusing. One 
is a man of technology and tangible items, the 
other a man of arcane powers. Vader totally 
confounds Motti. The admiral hates the Dark 
Lord's “sorcerous ways," but cannot stand against 
Vader's unbending faith. Tagge, the more ratio- 
nal of my chief aides, tends to avoid the Dark 
Lord. He will complain to me when hefeels Vader 
is out of earshot, but he will not challenge the 
Emperor's servant faceto face. Perhaps that will 
help him survive. Motti, I fear, will not last much 
beyond the completion of the battle station if he 
does not learn to keep his opinions to himself. 


x k k 


Personal Data Journal Entry #612, Tarkin re- 
cording ... 


With Lord Vader's unusual gifts of persuasion 
and motivation, we have completed the battle 
station ahead of schedule. Chief Lemelisk has 
been assigned to a new project. Using the plans 
from the Death Star, the Emperor has commis- 
sioned a series of new space platforms called 
Torpedo Spheres. However, I am keeping this 
fact a secret from even my most-trusted advi- 
sors. If no one knows that the Death Star is fully 
operational, then the word cannot leak out to the 
galaxy. The Emperor demands surprise, and I will 
comply. 

Still. there have been a few unfortunate inci- 
dents lately that have caused me some concern. 


13 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter One ———— I—"— Үү ү 3 > ЖЕШ 


14 


First, on my way from the Governor's Palace on 
Eriadu to take command of the Death Star's first 
test flight, a group of rebels intercepted my shuttle 
and made an attempt on my life. Luckily, Admiral 
Motti’s Star Destroyer appeared out of hy- 
perspace and were able to scatter the assassins. 
However, they did manage to make off with my 
servant. Iwill miss Ackbar. Losing a Mon Calamari 
is like losing a trusted pet. 

Second, I have arrived to find that spies have 
somehow managed to steal the technical plans 
for the Death Star. | am not worried. Bevel has 
constructed an invincible weapon. The plans will 
only prove that to any who have the ability to 
study them. However, the thieves must be cap- 


АВЕ 


tured so that a lesson сап be made of them. No 
onerobs from the Empire and lives to brag about 
the deed. 1 have been informed that Lord Vader 
himself has gone after the thieves. If he catches 
them, they will beg for death. Ihave seen what ће 
Dark Lord can do to a living man. It is not at all 
pleasant. 

No matter, for the time is at hand. It is time to 
test the Death Star, to reveal it to the galaxy. It is 
time for the fear to begin. It will start right here in 
Horuz system. I have ordered the superlaser to 
destroy the penal colony. After all, [cannot leave 
witnesses to our act of creation. 

And now, let the Emperor’s reign of fear begin! 


Death Star Technical Companion 


EE: 


` "Any attack made against this station would b 
-  @ useless gesture. This station is now the 
ultimate power in the universe." 


АР 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two 


ШЕ Chapter Two 
Technical Specifications 


16 


Whue the threat of the original Death Star was 
eliminated by the brave Rebels on Yavin Four, that 
does not mean that the technology and regime that 
led to its creation ended. This technical readout is 
presented to help all of you understand the Death 
Star's technology and the psychology of those who 
served upon it. We must assume that the Empire, 
which so willingly dedicated untold resources to 
те creation of the first Death Star, would eagerly 
do so again in order to gain so impressive an 
instrument of terror and destruction. 


— Admiral Ackbar 


The Death Star was the first Imperial deep- 
space mobile battle station. The armored sphere 
housed more destructive power than an entire 
Imperial fleet. It was the brainchild of Grand Moff 
Tarkin, realized by the design team of Chief Bevel 
Lemelisk, and authorized by the Emperor. 

Command of the battle station fellto the Grand 
Moff, with a joint second in command consisting 
ot Admiral Motti of the Imperial Navy and Gen- 
eral Tagge of the Imperial Army. Lord Darth 
Vader, as the Emperor's representative, was not 
part of the normal command structure and an 
swered only to the Grand Moff. 

The battle station carried the equivalent of an 
entire Sector Army within its armored shell, in- 
cluding no less than one hundred TIE fighter 
wings in operational order at any given time. 

In addition to specially-trained Death Star 
troopers, the Emperor insisted that the battle 
station carry two fulllegions of stormtroopers to 
serve as front line troops and to ensure that the 
Death Star remained in the hands of officers loyal 
to the New Order. Among the stormtrooper pla- 
toons were thoseunits trained for specific opera- 
tions — Zero-G stormtroopers, snowtroopers, 
seatroopers, sandtroopers, and scout troopers. 

Besides the huge amount of TIE fighters, the 
Death Star carried assault shuttles for boarding 
captured ships not deemed safe enough to trac- 
tor into a hold, blastboats for use as far-patrol 
craft, a limited number of small capital ships 


(specifically strike cruisers), drop-ships to carry 
troops and equipment to a planet's surface, land 
combat vehicles, and a wide variety of support 
craft such as shuttles, cargo haulcrs, repair plat- 
forms, and worker cabs. 

The Death Star had been designed to operate 
and behave much like any planetary body. The 
majority of the “habitable” areas were on the 
surface or within the two to four kilometer thick 
crust. The rest of the vast interior consisted of 
machinery, cngincs, ncarly-bottomless access 
and ventilation shafts, banks of computers, and 
the power core. 

Gravity within the battle station was handled 
by omni-directional gravity boosters built into 
decks, walls and ceilings. These gravity boosters 
changed orientation as easily as flipping a switch, 
and they were designed to allow the gravity 
orientation to be altered from sector to sector, or 
even from corridor to corridor. While hangar 
bays imposed gravity perpendicular to the Death 
Star’s core, adjoining corridors shifted the grav- 
ity orientation to coreward. In a situation where 
the gravity orientation changed from one section 
to the next, there were numerous warning signs. 
However, most gravity orientation transitions 
were accomplished by turbolifts, which employ 
gravity compensators oriented to the lift’s floor. 
While the lift was in transit, it would rotate to 
match the orientation of the destination deck, 
while the compensators would keep the occu- 
pants perfectly comfortable and completely un- 
aware that the gravity orientation had changed 
at all. 


Death Star Physical Layout 


The Death Star was divided into 24 zones, 12 in 
each hemisphere. Each zone was similar to a sub- 
battle station, had a bridge for coordinating all 
zone functions, and was divided into a series of 
city sprawls. 

Each zone had its own food replicators, han- 
gar bays, detention blocks, medical centers, ar- 
mories, command centers, and almost any other 


D ГА ——— ÁN Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two 


Craft: Custom Deep Space Battle 
Station 
Type: Deep space mobile battle 
station 
Scale: Death Star 
Length: 120 kilometers (diameter) 
Skill: Battle station piloting: Death 
Star 
Crew: 265,675, gunners: 57,276, 
skeleton 56,914/. 15 
Crew Skill: Astrogation 5D+1, battle 
station piloting 6D, capital ship 
gunnery 5D 
Passengers: 607,360 (troops), 
25,984 (stormtroopers), 42,782 
(starship support staff), 167,216 
(support ship pilots and crew) 
Cargo Capacity: Over one million 
kilotons 
Consumables: 3 years 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x4 
Hyperdrive Backup: x24 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Space: | 
Hull: 15D 
Shields: 2D 
Sensors: 

Passive: 250/0D 

Scan: 1,000/1D 


Death Star 
Battle Station 


Search: 5,000/2D+2 
focus: 40/4D 


Wcapons: 


Superlaser 
Fire Arc: Forward 
Crew: 168, skeleton 48/410 
Scale: Death Star 


Skill: Capital ship gunnery: 


superlaser 
Body: 12D (capital scalc) 
Space Range: 1-20/40/100 
Damage: 12D* 

5,000 Turbolaser Batteries 
Fire Arc: Turret** 
Crew: З 
Scale: Starfighter 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Body: 3D (capital scale) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range: 1-5/10/15 
Damage: 5D 

5,000 Heavy Turbolasers 
Fire Arc: Turret** 
Crew. 1 
Scale: Starfighter 
SRill: Starship gunnery 
Body: 4D (capital scale) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range: 1-7/15/30 
Damage: 7D 


2,500 Laser Cannons 
Fire Arc: Turret** 
Crew. 3 
Scale: Capital 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Body: 4D (capital scale) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range: 1–5/15/30 
Damage: 1D 
2,500 Ion Cannons 
Fire Arc: Turret** 
Crew: 4 
Scale: Capital 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Body: 4D (capital scale) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range: 1-5/15/30 
Damage: 4D 
768 Tractor Beam 
Emplacements 
Fire Arc: Turret** 
Crew: 6 
Scale: Capital 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Body: 5D (capital scale) 
Fire Control: 3D 
Space Range: 1-10/50/100 
Damage: 5D 


— ل‎ ee 


* The Death Star's power systems can generate 2D 


equipped with weapons. Only weapons within the 


of damage per hour. The Death Star's superlaser 
can only fire at maximum power. 


specific zone adjacent to an attacking ship can be 
brought to bear at any given time; often, the actual 


** Due to the immense size of the Death Star, it is number of weapons that can be brought to bear is 


divided into 24 distinct zones, each equally 


facility necessary to provide full services and 
fulfill апу mission al haud. These facilities took 
up a large portion of the crust. 

A sprawl was a city with a complete array of 
sector-dedicated facilities — medical facilities. 
mess halls, troop barracks, computer facilities, 
sensors, weaponry, security stations — which 
together composed an entire community. Within 
each sprawl, command, general, military, secu- 
rity, and service/technical sectors provided all 
necessary functions to the community, as well as 
coordinated activities throughout the Death Star. 
Many of the sprawls were specialized, emphasiz- 


significantly lower. 


ing one particular sector, and through coordina- 
tion with all other sprawls inthe zone, acomplete 
network of information exchange and unified 
activity was established. All of the “below sur- 
face” facilities within the crust of the Death Star 
were considered part of the city sprawl. 


Bridges 
The sectors of the Death Star cover specific, 
detailed portions of the operation of the massive 
battle station, and are designated by function: 
general. service/technical. military, security, and 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two ———————á——— STAR 
ARS _ 


TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS DIAGRAM 
Death Star Battle Station 


Superlaser 
Sos Т Focus Lens E 
. .. Surface "City" "The Eve" 2 
/ Blocks у ye 
/ 
Polar Trench / 2 
(North/South) E d Quadanium Steel / 
= 
N Outer Hull E 
р 
Ф 
мш 
E) 
g 
v 
x= 
Е 
5 
e 
e£. 
$i 
Ф 
=: 
EZ 
B 
Ф 
T | 
E 
LÀ 
E % 
E | Equatorial 
Trench 
| 


Mid-Hemisphere 
Trench (North/South) 7 


120 Kilometers-— | 


Note: Detail is limited at the scale shown. 


18 


STA Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two 
"WA 
0 10 20 30 40 General Layout 
— _ wm ` Cross Section 
Command 
kilometers Corc 
Habitable _ North Pole 
Crust 
Superlaser 
Housing 
Computer 
Core * 
Ready Power Cells 
Ф 
Hyper Drives e Hyper Drives 
Equator ~~~ 5 
Sublight Drives E Sublight Drives 
i E 
Ready Power Cells 
Computer 
Deep Armory Core * 
& 


Hangar Bays 


Super Star Nec Surface "City" 


Destroyer Sprawls 
South Pole 


— —— 


. Imperial Star 
Destroyer 


Selected ships to scale 


Rob Caswell 


* Includes astrogation, general & weapons control subsystems 


19 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter TWO LLL———M————— Е ВАВ 
T à T — —P — WARS" 


command. Each zone also had a designated com- 
mand sprawl called a bridge. 

The bridges were responsible for gathering 
information and data from all other sprawls in 
the zone. The bridge would then relay pertinent 
information to other zone bridges, theoverbridge 
(which ran the entire battle station) and sector 
command (which was responsihle for coordinat- 
ing all sector activities throughout the Death 
Star). In this manner, each zone commander 
would be fully aware of what was happening 
within his zone, while each sector commander 
would be fully informed about the efficiency and 
activities of a particular sector throughout the 
hattle station. The overbridge would draw upon 
both pools of information, and therefore had an 
excellent overview of the station's functions. 


Defense Status 


The defense status of Imperial installations 
defines the level of security in effect at any given 
lime. For tlie Deall Star (and most other Imperial 
facilities), the defense status and preparedness 
takes different forms in different sectors. Below, 
the defense status levels are defined, and these 
definitions are followed by specific details con- 
cerning the different zones, sprawls and sectors. 


Defstat Levels 


The Death Star operated on a four-level de- 
fense status (or defstat) system. Defstat Zero 
was the normal state of the battle station, with 
duty posts and defenses set at their regular level 
of day-to-day operations. Whenthe battle station 
was placed on Defstat One, it was on a first stage 
alert status. All defenses were upgraded to ac 
commodate this higher level of alertness. If the 
Death Star was in the same sector of space as 
enemy or unidentified craft, the station advanced 
to Defstat Two. The highest level of defense, set 
during times of combat, was Defstat Three. 

Most Imperial facilities operate on a similar, if 
not identical, defstat system. Due to the enor- 
mous size of the Death Star and the particular 
nature of a threat, various zones and sprawls 
could have been at different defstat levels. 

Detstat levels could also have been increased 
or decreased on the basis of internal threats or 
disturbances. In these cases, Defstat increases 
are normally restricted by zane and sector, with 
all areas outside the zone under Defstat Zero 
unless it is believed the threat will be able to 
encroach upon adjoining sectors and zones. 

The following descriptions assume the char- 
acters have set off alarms within the base and are 
the subject of a manhunt. If the base is under 
attack from outside forces, the amount of troop 
activity increases, but the troops are preparing 


for battle and do not suspect that Rebels may 
have actually penetrated the base. 


Defstat Zero: Normal level of alertness, no change 
in guard posts. Two-man security guard patrols 
and remotes perform regular checks of the sec- 
tor, arriving on the roll of 1 ona six-sided die (roll 
every 10 minutes of game time). Patrols can be 
avuided міш Easy злеак rolls. 

Locked doors are Set at their normal difficulty 
and require security rolls equal to or better than 
the difficulty number to gain access. If the secu- 
rity rollis less, the attempt fails and that charac- 
ter cannot make another attempt on that door. If 
the security roll is half the difficulty number or 
less, the character fails and sets off an alarm, 
immediately placing the sprawl on Defstat One. 

Computer terminals are set at their normal 
difficulty. To defeat computer security and gain 
access to restricted data, or to manipulate a 
computer terminal to shut down connected sys- 
tems, acharacter must make a computer program- 
ming roll cqual to or better than the difficulty 
number. If the roll is less, the attempt fails. If the 
roll is half the difficulty number or less, the 
character not only fails, but sets off an alarm, 
immediately placing the sprawl on Defstat One. 


Defstat One: No change in guard posts. In addi- 
tion to two-man security guard patrols and 
remotes (which arrive on aroll of 1), stormtrooper 
squads begin patrolling (arriving on a roll of 2). 
Stormtrooper squads are made up of one squad 
leaderand seventroopers.Patrols can beavoided 
with Moderate sneak rolls. 

Increase the difficulty numbers of all locked 
doors (other than blast doors) by 2. If the security 
roll is less, the attempt fails and that character 
cannot make another attempt on that door. Ifthe 
security roll is half the difficulty number or less, 
the character fails and sets off an alarm, immedi- 
ately placing the sprawl and all adjoining sprawls 
on Defstat Two. In addition, guards will be routed 
to that sprawl and all adjoining sprawls. 

Increase Ше difficully numbers of all com- 
puter stations by 2. If the computer programming 
roll is less, the attempt fails. If the roll is half the 
difficulty number or less, the character fails and 
sets off an alarm, immediately placing the sprawl 
and all nearby sprawls on Defstat Two. 


Defstat Two: Guard post personnel are doubled. 
In addition to two-man security guard patrols 
and remotes (which arrive on a rol) of 1), 
stormtrooper squads step up their patrols (ar- 
riving on a roll of 2 or 3). Patrols can be avoided 
with Difficult sneak rolls. 

Increase the difficulty numbers of all locked 
doors (other than blast doors) by another 5. If the 
security rollis less, the attempt tails and that char- 


20 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two 


TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS DIAGRAM 
Death Star Zone Layout 


———— Command 
P d Core 
24 Equal Sections, 12 per Hemisphere 
. . Hangar 


Polar Bays 


Trench — T a | | ____- Deep 
т Storage 


Zone Central 


C d 
генсе Computer 


Core 


.. Deep 


Armory 


Hemisphere ^ 


Trench ч | 


| Deep 
Surface / ч До же Storage 
City ; = 
Sprawl | depen _______ Hangar 
| Bays 


рв Bulk 


Storage 


ss Liquid Bulk 
Storage 


~~~ Hyperdrives 


___ Habitable Crust 
(2 km thick) 


Note: One active bridge oversees all activity in each 
zone. Each zone contains command, military, security, 
technical, service, hangar and general sectors. Some 
features In thìs dlagram are exaggerated for clarity. 


Ro» Caswell 


21 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two — —— — —nm—————— uv AR 
2 پڪ ڪڪ‎ WARST 


TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS DIAGRAM 
Death Star Carried Craft Complement 


AN 


Total Compiement Embarked 


Á TH Ts Du | X ^ 4 Capital Ships 
- 100 TIE Fighter Wi 
— 3,600 i aie ee 


dH, p 2,840 Blastboats 
1,860 Drop-Ships 
13,000 Support Craft 


А 11,016 Land Vehicles 


TIE FIGHTER 


Starfighters т р 


STRIKE CRUISER ASSAULT SHUTTLE 


MOBILE 
COMMAND BASE 


Land Vehicles 


FLOATING 
FORTRESS 


Stephen Crane 


-STAR Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two 


acter cannot make another attempt on that door. If 
the security roll is halt the difficulty number or less, 
the character not only fails, he sets off an alarm, 
immediately placing the zone on Defstat Three. 

Increase the difficulty numbers of all com- 
puter stations by another 5. If the computer pro- 
gramming roll is less, the attempt fails. If the roll 
is half the difficulty number or less, the character 
not only fails, he sets ott an alarm, immediately 
placing the zone on Defstat Three. 


Defstat Three: In addition to doubled personnel 
guard posts, two-man security guard patrols апа 
remotes (which arrive on a roll of 1), and 
stormtrooper squads (arriving on a roll of 2 or 3), 
squads of Death Star troopers take up defensive 
positions throughout the sector. Death Star 
trooper squads consist of a leader and seven 
troopers. Patrols can be avoided with Difficult 
sneak rolls. 

All blast doors seal around the alerted area, 
requiring security rolls to open (the difficulty is 
labeled by sector below). Increase the difficulty 
numbers of all locked doors (other than blast 
doors) by another 7. If the security roll is less, the 
attempt fails and that character cannot make 
another attempt оп Шай door. If the security roll 
is halfthe difficulty number or less, the character 
fails and sets off an alarm, immediately alerting a 
nearby patrol (roll a six-sided die: 1-2. security 
patrol; 3-5, stormtrooper squad; 6, Death Star 
trooper squad). 

Increase the difficulty numbers of all com- 
puter stations by another 7. If the computer pro- 
gramming roll is less, the attempt fails. If the roll 
is half the difficulty number or less, the character 
fails and sets off an alarm, immediately alerting a 
nearby patrol (roll a six-sided die: 1-2, security 
patrol; 3-5, stormtrooper squad; 6, Death Star 
trooper squad). 


Difficulties by Sector 


Although sprawls are the physical basis of the 
Death Star organization, the difficulty of pen- 
etrating security and computer systems is de- 
pendent upon the type of sector the characters 
are in. The dificulties are based on Defstat Zero, 
and represent the difficulty of simply accessing 
the Imperial computer system (characters with 
appropriate rank cylinders do not need to make 
this roll.). 


Command Sector Difficulty Numbers 


Locked Doors: Difficult. 
Computer Tcrminals: Difficult. 
Blast Doors: Very Difficult. 


General Sector Difficulty Numbers 
Locked Doors: Easy. 

Computer Terminals: Easy. 

Blast Doors: Moderate. 


Military Sector Difficulty Numbers 


Locked Doors: Moderate. 
Computer Terminals: Difficult. 
Blast Doors: Difficult. 


Security Sector Difficulty Numbers 
Locked Doors: Difficult. 

Computer Terminals: Very Difficult. 

Blast Doors: Very Difficult. 


service Sector Difficulty Numbers 


Locked Doors: Easy. 
Computer Terminals: Moderate. 
Blast Doors: Moderate. 


Technical Sector Difficulty Numbers 
Locked Doors: Moderate. 
Computer Terminals: Moderate. 
Blast Doors: Difficult. 


Hangar Bay Difficulty Numbers 


Locked Doors: Moderate. 
Computer Terminals: Difficult. 
Blast Doors: Very Difficult. 


Rank Cylinders 


Rank cylinders are issued to Imperial officers 
and, if acquired by Rebels, can be very helpful іп 
navigating the Imperial computer network. Each 
rank cylinder has a specific entry code to insure 
that only an authorized user is attempting to dis- 
play sensitive information. Each rank cylinder is 
labeled by sector, level of sensitivity and zone. 
Within its area of authority, a rank cylinder could 
display any information. For example, a Zone N8 
Moderate General rank cylinder would allow a user 
with the appropriate access code to display and 
use any information from zone N8's general sector 
of Moderate or lower difficulty. If the appropriate 
code is known there is no roll necessary to access 
the information — it is automatically available. A 
character must make a Difficult security check to 
falsity a code. However, if an incorrect code is 
entered or theuser attempts to access information 
that is not authorized for the user, a warning is 
immediately relayed to the command sector for 
the battle station and a full investigation begins 
shortly thereafter. A rank cylinder may also be 
uscd in the samc manner to access secured areas 
and doors. Rank cylinders are normally restricted 
to access for just one vessel, or perhaps one por- 
tion of a vessel, but high-ranking officers, such as 
Grand Moff Tarkin, had rank cylinders that allowed 


23 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two а D БА m. 
ARS 


TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS DIAGRAM 
Death Star Command Organization Tables 


Grand Moff STORMTROOPER 
Lord 


Darth 
А Vadcr STORMTROOPERS 
Admiral General EMPEROR'S 


Motti Tagge EMISSARY 
IMPERIAL NAVY IMPERIAL ARMY 


NAVY ARMY BATTLE STATION 
OPERATIONS OPERATIONS OPERATIONS 
NAVY 
OPERATIONS 


Locistics | |PERSONNEL| | SECURITY | | READINESS | | STRATEGIC | | TACTICAL SCOUT SUPPORT 
OFFICER OFFICER OFFICER OFFICER FORCES FORCES FORCES OFFICER 
OFFICER OFFICER OFFICER 


OPERATING FORCES 


ARMY 
OPERATIONS 


LOGISTICS | |PERSONNEL| | SECURITY | | READINESS SE ТЕТЕ ОЕ SUPPORT 
OFFICER OFFICER OFFICER OFFICER e GER E OFFICER 


OPERATING FORCES 


BATTLE STATION 
OPERATIONS 


LOGISTICS | |PERSONNEL| | SECURITY | | STATION ENGI MEDICAL | | TECHNICAL | | MAINT. 
OFFICER || OFFICER OFFICER || DEFENSES | | NEERING || OFFICER j| SUPPORT | AND REPAIR 
OFFICER || OFFICER OFFICER || OFFICER 


OPERATING FORCES 


Stepren Crane 


ЎТА... Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two 


them virtually unlimited access to any portion of 
the battle station and a great amount of leeway 
within the entire Imperial network. 

Low-ranking officers (such as lieutenants and 
captains) have rank cylinders accessing Moder- 
ate information within their sector and zone. 
Officers of rank commander through colonel had 
cylinders accessing up to Very Difficult informa- 
tion within their sector and zone and Very Easy 
or Easy cylinders for other zones. Admirals and 
generals had Very Difficult cylinders for all sec- 
tors aboard their craft or fleet, while the Grand 
Moff had Very Difficult cylinders for all sectors 
aboard the craft as well as at least Easy access to 
the entire Imperial network. The specific rank 
cylinders allotted were determined by the par- 
ticular officer's duties, and since these cylinders 
were constantly monitored by security sector 
few officers were willing to abuse the power 
entrusted to them. 

Characters who somehow acquire rank cylin- 
ders may he in for an unpleasant surprise if they 
are not cautious. Attempting to access unautho- 
rized information or accessing data in a "suspi- 
cious" manner often alerts Imperial authorities 
in the zone bridge, the overbridge or one of the 
security sectors. Since representatives from se- 
curity are constantly monitoring the computer 


systems of any Imperial facility, it is likely that 
such officers will be alerted to unauthorized 
computer use unless the characters' efforts are 
inconspicuous. 


Doors 

The two types of doors on the Death Star are 
regular doors and blast doors. If а character 
doesn't want to be subtle, he can try to blast his 
way through a locked door or sealed blast door, 
but this automatically alerts security to the 
intruder's presence. Aregular door has a body ot 
3D. A blast door has a body of 6D. The character 
must get an incapacitated result to create a hole 
large enough to step through. 


Computer Programming Rolls 

Characters attempting to manipulate the Im- 
perial computer network have their work cut out 
for them. The Death Star's computer network 
was one of the most sophisticated and secure 
ever constructed, and it is amazing to many 
Alliance researchers that R2-D2 was able to so 
expertly extract information despite the assis- 
tance he gained from the Death Star's plans. 

When a character attempts to manipulate an 
Imperial computer terminal, he can have many 
goals in mind. The most simple use of a terminal 


TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS DIAGRAM 
Computer Programming Flow Chart 


General 
Easy 


Moderate 


Restricted 


Level 0 


Command 
Difficult 

Level 2 

Difficult 


Restricted 


e — 
Technical 
Moderate 


Service 
Moderate 


Moderate 


Restricted 
Level 1 
Moderate 


c EE 
Restricted 


| Level 3 
М Difficult 


Moderate 


Hangar Bay | 


ш 


Difficult 


25 


Stephen Crane 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Two sss И ЖА E. 


26 


is to manipulate systems connected directly to 
the terminal, such as doors or turbolifts con- 
trolled from the station. It is also fairly easy to 
gain access to the work files used by the terminal. 
The computer programming difficulties listed on 
page 23 (and repeated on the Computer Pro- 
gramming Flow Chart) reflect the difficulty of 
merelyaccessing the Imperial computer network 
Characters with the appropriate rank cylinder 
and identification code can automatically access 
the data governed by the cylinder, but the cylin- 
der is of no use for information above the clear- 
ance allowed by the cylinder (Very Ease, Easy, 
Moderate, Difficult or Very Difficult), nor will it 
assist with information outside its authorized 
sectors or zones. Gamemasters must determine 
at which box on the chart the data the characters 
are seeking is stored. 

Once a character has made a successful com- 
puter programming roll to infiltrate the system (or 
gotten in through a rank cylinder), he must also 
make computer programming rolls to extract in- 
formation or use the system. The gamemaster 
must set the difficulty for any action the charac- 
ters attempt. For example, at Defstat Zero, it isa 
Very Easy task to open up a General Sector 
turbolift, although if the station is at Defstat Two, 
that task may become Easy. For another ex- 
ample, it may be Very Easy to get a duty roster 
from a General Sector terminal, but Very Difficult 
to get a copy of Grand Moff Tarkin’s itinerary. 


Other Sectors and Zones 


Once a character is inside the Empire's com- 
puter system at a particular facility, that does not 
mean that they can use the system freely. There 
are numerous safeguards to prevent unautho- 
rized use (remember that the Imperial war ma- 
chine doesn't fully trust many of its soldiers). 
Many times characters will tind that the intorma- 
tion they are seeking is only available in another 
sector of the computer system. Characters at- 
tempting to move from one sector to another 
must make computer programming rolls equal to 
the difficulty listed on the Computer Program- 
ming flow Chart. For example, a character al- 
ready in the Hangar Bay system wants to access 
data in the Technical sector. He must make a 
Moderate computer programming roll to get 
around one of the computer system safeguards, 
symbolized by the blacked-in circles on the Flow 
Chart. Then, he must make a Moderate computer 
programming roll to get into the Technical sector. 

The Death Stars mammoth computer system 
was even more difficult to manipulate. When R2-D2 
was looking for information on Princess Leia, he 
had to cross several zones in addition to moving 
from the Hangar Bay sector to the Security sector. 
To cross from one zone to another, the character 


ARS 


must make an Fasy computer programming roll If 
the rollis successful, the character can now access 
data in another zone, but they are still in the same 
sector. Once the character is in the new zone, he 
can move to other sectors with additional com- 
puter programming rolls. 


Alarms 


Characters must be exceptionally careful not 
to set off alarms while maneuvering in the Impe- 
rial computer net. Any character who simply fails 
the computer programming rollis merely stopped 
and that information is denied to them at that 
time; he cannot try to get information or get into 
the sector later. 

Any character who fails a computer program- 
ming roll by more than half the difficulty sets off 
alarms in whatever sector he is using. Security 
sector agents will attempt to run a trace on the 
terminal responsible for the alarm, which is a 
Moderate computer programming roll, with a +3 
modifier to difficulty if the character is in a differ- 
ent sector. This takes only one round. 

If the trace is successful, the terminal is locked 
out of the system, and Death Star troopers or 
stormtroopers are dispatched to the terminal. In 
addition, the city sprawl is placed on Defstat Two. 


Restricted Levels 

Restricted levels of information are designated 
by the security sector and provide a convenient 
means for command and security personnel to 
access data from all over the battle station. 

Restricted Level 0 contains all of the informa- 
tion from the general, service and technical sec- 
tors. Restricted Level 1 contains all of the infor 
mation from the hangar bay and military sectors. 
Restricted Level 2 contains all of the information 
from the security sector, while Restricted Level 3 
contains all of the information from the com- 
mand sector. At the Very Difficult level of infor- 
mation from Restructed Level 3, characters will 
be able to find complete transcripts of all com 
munications sent to or from the facility (such as 
communiques from the Emperor himself). 

Within Restricted Levels , characters can ac- 
cess any information, regardless of zone. They 
can also move between sectors with Easy com- 
puter programming rolls (at Restricted Level 0, 
characters entering in the general sector could 
access service or technical sector information 
with an Easy roll.). However, any character who 
fails a computer programming roll in a restricted 
level automatically sets off an alarm and security 
personnel only need to make an Easy computer 


programming roll to trace the terminal that trig- 
gered the alarm. 


ШИ Chapter Three 
City Sprawls and 


Trenches 


From a distance, the Death Star appeared to be 
а small moon that had somehow broken free of a 
planetary body, floating alone in the black void. 
Closer up and detail that marks this sphere as 
something more than natural becomes plainly 
visible. The most obvious feature was the Eye, a 
huge collector lens that focused the sphere’s 
power into a cohesive beam of energy, the 
superlaser. Closer still, and canyons, mountains 
and valleys began to appear across the sphere’s 
surfacc. Unlike natural formations, these surface 
details ran in parallel lines, or at right angles, 
appearing as true geometric patterns. Then the 
lights became visible. By then it's too late to 
escape the Death Star. 

The surface of the Death Star was a planet in 
miniature. Great city sprawls covered the sphere, 
each designated a duty similar to a рјапе -роџпа 


Imperial installation. Shield projectors were op- 
erated by huge work stations. Multi-storied tow- 
ers contained turbolasers, and these in turn were 
grouped into skyline batteries capable of spray- 
ingthe sky with streams of energy. Giant commu- 
nications islands handled incoming and outgo- 
ing holo and voice transmissions. Sensor arrays 
were laid out like fields of wheat, sweeping space 
and relaying data to the main computers. 

In addition, spacetraffic controllers maintained 
lowers өп Ше surface, directing the wide variety of 
ships traveling around the Death Star from hangar 
bays to space and back again. Finally, the surface 
wasriddled with thermal exhaust ports, heat sinks, 
sublight thrusters, hyperdrive thrusters, 
transparisteel viewports, cosmic ray sinks, energy 
flush vents, and navigation lights, all working to- 
вешег to create the Empire's weapon of fear. 


First Impression 


Travos, D. L. 
Personal Diary, Entry: GH556^8]3E 


Finally, my years of hard work are re- 
warded. It was not an easy task, working my 
way up through the ranks of common sol- 
diers. But, my ambition, my motivation was 
clear to all who looked at mc, and my rc- 
ward has been great: I have been assigned 
aboard the greatest weapon ever built. Гат 
aproud soldier aboard the Death Star, hand- 
picked by Grand Moff Tarkin, serving for 
the glory of the Emperor. 

Upon reaching this great station, my 
senses were overwhelmed. Wecks of prepa- 
ration had not prepared те for the sights ог 
sounds. As I stepped onto the flight deck 
and drank in the first breath of air, I knew | 
belonged here. Even now, as I write this, I 
can feel the mechanical thrum of the the 
massive engines. It pulses with a steady 
rhythm, a heartbeat that pulls every soul 
along to its pulse. Everyone aboard realizes 


the sheer power beneath our feet and all 
around us. 

The orientation was brief and adequately 
prepared me for my duties. It was difficult 
to pay attention to the droning lecture — 1 
know my mission, ] know my part in this 
machine. I was enraptured by the constant 
clang of boots upon the decks, the hum of 
the air systems, the constant activity as 
troops, officers and Droids carried out their 
tasks, and I realized that I was a part of this 
great organism of steel liat dominates the 
galaxy. 

The feeling of power is enormous. To 
know that every system in the galaxy will 
respect and fear the Death Star. To know 
that I will be feared and respected just for 
mentioning my base. For the glory of the 
Empire. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Three 


STA 


City Sprawl North 7: A68 
City Sprawl North 7: A68, located in the Death 
Star's northern hemisphere, zone N7, was typical 
of the hundreds of constructs and work stations 
dotting the battle station's surface. Alone, City 
Sprawl North 7: A68 could only gather and ana- 
lyze a limited amount of data pertaining to the 
space around the Death Star. But like the other 
city sprawls. all of its data was fed directly to the 
zone's command sector computers on the bridge, 
as well as the overall sector command and the 
overbridge interior central computers for analy- 
sis and compilation. The computers, in turn, 
created a complete view of the Death Star's near 
space for the command sector's perusal. 

While City Sprawl North 7: A68 operated as an 
independent and isolated village, its sensors and 
communications nets constantly fed information 
to the central computers. If necessary, its own 
cunipulers Could be taken over by the central 
computers when more coordinated activity was 
necessary. 

Like all citv sprawls, North 7: A68 had repre- 
sentatives from all of the major sectors operating 
aboard the Death Star. Command, military, secu- 
rity, service/technical, hangar, and general sec- 
tors maintained operation ceulers within the 
confines of the sprawl, each with a commanding 
officer who reported to interior command. Ulti- 
mately, the chain of command worked up to 
Operations Command and the command trium- 
virate of Tarkin, Motti and Tagge. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Three — —— HáÁ——£———— iD T ЖА a 


North 7: A68 Locations 


Shield Projectors and Operator Stations 


The three shield projection towers emitted a 
covering field that protected the city sprawl from 
space debris and offered limited defense against 
ray weapons. Power cells, machinery, and shield 
operator stations were located in the building 
beneath the three towers. 

Shield operation fell under the jurisdiction of 
Battle Station Operations. Officers, operators, 
and technicians were stationed here around the 
clock, kccping thc shiclds above North 7: A68 in 
working order. In times of attack or other crisis, 
the shields were overlapped with those of the 
neighboring sprawls to create a continuous blan- 
ket of energy over the surface of the Death Star. 


General Quarters 


The large gencral quarters building provided 
apartments for all of the operating forces sta- 
tioned in North 7: A68. In addition to living quar- 
ters, the building had recreational areas, mess 
halls, duty shops, and sport courts. Maintenance 
and management of general quarters fell to Battle 
Station Operations, but the building was divided 
into areas where army and navy operations had 
jurisdiction and activities were monitored by 
their own support personnel. 


Command Center 


The command center featured the offices of all 
command personnel assigned to North 7: A68, as 
well as meeting rooms, officer apartments, anda 


map n——————————— Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Three 
WARS ERI 


tactical center for coordinating operations with 
other sprawls and with the interior command. 
Command, like the Death Star itself, was a joint 
operation of navy, army and battle station per- 
sonnel. 


Communications 


The giant communications bubble gathered 
sublight and hyperspace transmissions, as well 
as holonet broadcasts, and relayed these incom- 
ing messages to the appropriate agency. As these 
incoming transmissions could be picked up by 
any sprawl, depending on the orientation of the 
battle station, all communications relays were 
on-line at all times. Coded transmissions were 
left in their original torm and passed on to the 
person or department named for delivery unless 
instructed otherwise by interior command. 

Additionally, again depending on the battle 
station’s orientation, any communications relay 
may have been called upon to send an outgoing 
transmission via either sublight or holonet broad- 
casters. Communications was a division of Battle 
Station Operations, although the army and navy 
maintained their own communications depart- 
ments. 


Hangar North 7: A68 


Like all sprawls, North 7: A68 had its own 
hangar bays. Shuttles and support craft carried 
personnel and supplies from one part of the giant 
battle station to another. À central control tower 
monitored and regulated air traffic around the 
sprawl, and the hangar had both a magnetically- 
shielded interior bay and a surface landing plat- 
form. From this hangar, ships could be lowered 
via platform lifts into the battle station's interior 
for storage or major overhauls and repairs. 


Sensor Array Village 


Because it took up such a large portion of the 
sprawl, the sensor array and its control center 
was referred to as a village. The sensors con- 
stantly monitored space for energy readings, 
navigational hazards, incoming vessels, commu- 
nication transmissions, and other information 
vital to the battle station's operation. These sen- 
sors were of combat quality, searching the sky 
above for electromagnetic emissions, sound, 
motion, vibrations, gravitational and magnetic 
fields, heat, pressure, trace chemicals, and even 
other sensor emissions. 

The sensor suite field contained both short- 
and long-range sensors, both in active and pas- 
sivemode. Sensor sweeps could be configuredto 
à general scan, a search along a narrow band of 
transmission wavelengths, or even focus on an 


extremely small area of space for highly-detailed 
data collection. All information gathered by the 
sensor array village was analyzed by the station 
operators andthe interior command computers. 


Turbolaser Battery 


Three turbolaser towers were grouped into a 
single, fire-linked battery. It provided the area 
with synchronized protection against attacking 
craft. These were basically anti-spacecraft weap- 
ons which used turbine generators and capaci- 
tor banksto build up, store and fire very powerful 
laser pulses. 


The City Sprawl Community 
Each city sprawl was similar in design and 
form, but many of them had specialized func- 
tions. The majority of sprawls were almost wholly 
generalsector areas, with endless corridors, quar- 
ters for personnel, medical facilities, mess halls, 
recreation facilities and maintenance areas. These 


LFL 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Three ——————w А ү > ЖЕШ 


ARS" 


CITY SPRAWLS AND TRENCHES DIAGRAM General ` — 
City Sprawl North 7: A68 Quarters | Shield Projector 


| Operation 
Turbolaser \ Stations 
Tower Battery ` 


Plan View 


Thermal 
Exhaust 
Port 


Heat Sink 


Sensor Suite Field 


Sensor Array 
Station 


Landing 


| Platform d M Shield 
Command i | i 
Eu EM Cosmic Ray Projector 


Center Sink Energy 
City Sprawl M. Flush Vents 
NT: А68 N || 


Shield 
Projector 


Communications 


Equator 
Elevation View 


0.5 1.0 | Shield Projector 
ш ш ш мо | 


Operation Stations 


kilometers 


Зор Caswell 


Reece Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Three 


"WA 


CITY SPRAWLS AND TRENCHES DIAGRAM 
Typical Surface Trench 


Turbolaser ` ` 
Towers 


Trench Cross- 
Sectional View 


Thermal 
Exhaust Port 


Energy | t о М S | E 
Flush Vent | E У] > Ce 
ay Sin 


Heat 
Sink 


Hangar Bays 


Service 
Access 
Ports 


Shield 
Projector 


31 


Rob Caswell 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Three n A А "H 


ARS 


The A68 Market 


The Empire’s reputation for discipline 
and fine training cannot be disputed. How- 
ever, even the most dedicated Imperial sol- 
dier needs certain items that aren't Impe- 
rial issue. On a complex the size of the 
Death Star there were several "black mar- 
kets" where almost any good or service 
could be bought. City sprawl North 7: A68 
had the largest and most active network of 
black marketeers on the entire station. Con- 
trolled by Lieutenant Gorsick Dommaro of 
the Security Sector, the "A68 Market" of- 
fered Imperial personnel many sought-after 
items — weapons, illegal holo-vids, and 
personal electronics. Dommaro had built 
up an extensive network of junior officers 
who were able to secure and smuggle these 
items onto the station (or subtly alter the 
replicators and manufacturing orders so 


sprawls were also. the least secure, and were 
most open to infiltration from outside forces. 
The Imperial mindset allows carcful Alliance 
operatives a huge amount of latitude within these 
areas. As long as the operative has a carefully 
constructed false identity or can falsify orders 
that sound at least partially authentic they will 
seldom be questioned regarding their actions. 
Many Alliance spies have been able to plant 
bombs in gencral sectors of many bases while 
disguised as maintenance personnel — Imperial 
officers never thought to ask about their activi- 
ties because they just assumed the “maintenance” 
people were performing assigned duties. 


Using North 7: A68 in the 
Roleplaying Game 

City Sprawl North 7: A68, like other sections of 
the Death Star, was built using prefabricated 
Imperial materials. This means that an Imperial 
research station or outpost on any world will 
look very similar to North 7: A68. If you don't 
want to have your Rebel group go up against the 
Death Star, have them go up against a planct- 
bound Imperialinstallation to retrieve data, knock 
out sensor or communications capabilities, kid- 
nap an Imperial officer, free prisoners, or short 


that goods were manufactured by the sta- 
tion). Using an elaborate series of contacts 
and couriers, these items were smuggled 
into sprawl A68 and other nearby sprawls. 
Because of the nature of the battle station, 
Dommaro could command the highest 
prices for these goods, and the profits were 
distributed on down the line to keep every- 
one quiet. 

The AG8 Market itself was not a physical 
location, as much as a matter of making a 
contact with one of several “representa- 
tives.” Most meetings were held in a side 
access corridor near the Sensor Array Vil- 
lage, but customers normally had to go 
through several discreet meetings before 
they could actually acquire what they were 
looking for. 


circuit protective shields in advance of a space- 
to-ground attack. 


Typical Surface Trench 


The trenches that cut across the surface of the 
Death Star at right angles and in straight lines 
contained the important vents and ports for expel- 
ling built-up heat and waste, as well as service 
ports and some hangar bays. The trenches were 
also used by flying craft as directional markers. 

A typical surface trench stretched for many 
kilometers in a straight line. Some even circum- 
vented the entire sphere, like grand canyons of 
metal on a world of steel. Guarding the many 
access and disposal ports were low-energy shield 
projectors, but the main source of protection 
came from the many turbolaser towers that jut- 
ted from the top of the trenches or the trench 
floors. Mostly, however, these small accesses 
into the battle station were not seen as viable 
threats to the Death Star’s safety. For this reason, 
the protection afforded by the shields and laser 
towers was for show at best. A concerted effort 
by small, tast startighters could easily run the 
trench gauntlet. While the designers were aware 
of this, they did not believe that any sane pilot 
would dare such an assault against the much 
larger and powerful Death Star. 


32 


— уу... — EP Death Star Technical Com anion: Chapter Three 
WA 


i 


ч 
Е 
H 
к? 
A 
rw 
3 
z 
А: 
ig 
| 43 
~ 
- 
I 
T 
©” 
d 
p 


Zei 


a 


33 


AR. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Four 


ШЕ Chapter Four 
Hangar Bays 


34 


The Death Star was more than a single, giant 
battle station. It was alsoaspacecraft carrier onthe 
most grand scale: a small, artificial planetary body 
complete with enough hangar bays, space traffic 
and ships to make all but the largest space ports 
envious. 


Typical Hangar Bay 


Atypical hangar bay had an open maw to space, 
revealing a well-lit hollow flight compartment. The 
opening, however, was an illusion. A powerful 
magnetic field projected across the opening kept 
atmosphere inside and vacuum outside, but could 
be manipulated in intensity to allow spacecraft 
entry and exit. At times a bay was emptied of 
personnel (except those in protective gear) so that 
the magnetic field could be lowered completely. 
This had to be done for approaching craft with 
certain kinds of shield or engine damage. As there 
were times when a bay was exposed to naked 
space, all bays were designed to be closed off from 
the rest of the battle station. All blast doors and lifts 
formed vacuum-worthy seals to retain station at- 
mosphere integrity. 

Hangar bays appeared as huge, empty cavities 
waiting for ships to fill them. But even when no 
ships were present, a hangar bay was far from 
empty. The walls and deck were lined with power 
cell charger sockets where parked craft could 
obtain fuel for their next mission. Directional mark- 
ings etched into the deck were illuminated by the 
tower to guide ships to a safe resting place. The 
solid deck was also an illusion. Depending on the 
size of the bay, one or more sections of the deck 
floor were opened to forma vehicle lift from armor- 
les or supplies sections deeper inside the station 
or on different decks. All hangar bays were built 
perpendicular to the Death Star’s core, so ships 
would appear to be flying straight into the Death 
Star. Most of the corridors immediately surround- 
ing the hangar were also built with this gravity 
orientation, unlike the majority of the station, which 
liad a graviLy orientation toward the core. 


All hangar bays had пасин beani projectors 
and interior emergency repulsor fields to deal with 
damaged vessels. Tractor beams guided craft that 
hadlostenginesordirectionalthrusters, and emer- 
gency generators could flood a bay with a repulsor 
field to cushion landings. 

Finally, every hangar contained some type of 
control tower. Larger hangars featured large 
plastisteel booths high on the wall, which housed 
the control instruments and staff. Smaller bays 
accomplished the same tasks with raised control 
platforms. As these platforms tended to become 
exposed to space at the most inconvenient mo- 
ments, controller Droids handled incoming and 
outgoing traffic from these stations. 

Various-sized hangar bays ringed the battle sta- 
tion like latitude lines. These major bays were 
surrounded by support decks which contained 
vehicle maintenance shops, emergency medical 
stations, pilot ready rooms, and repulsorlift shafts 
connecting to deep storage bays. Smaller shuttle 
hangars could handle one or two craft and were 
found all over the battle station. They were nor- 
mally used for station personnel movement. Ships 
first arriving at the Death Star or leaving for deep 
space normally worked with a latitude bay control 
tower. 


TIE Fighter Bays 


A TIE fighter hangar bay is somewhat different 
from a standard craft bay. This is due to the TIE’s 
strange configuration: a TIE has no landing gear. 

ATIE bay is any bay equipped with ceiling racks. 
These racks hold TIEs suspended several meters 
above the deck. While many bays contain at least 
a single ПЕ rack, a tew bays have been completely 
designed to serve the TIE fighter. These huge bays 
hold a full wing of the starfighters, and the sur- 
rounding decks are designed to offer total support 
to the TIEs and their pilots. The Death Star’s TIE 
fighter bays were only unusual in their size, since 


== T AR Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Four 


HANGAR BAYS DIAGRAM 
Hangar Bay L44-S3 


Directional Markings 
Assault Shuttle 


Magnetic Field Projector 


Control Tower 


Vehicle Lift 


ооо о 0/0 0 0 0 0 Oo 


о 


^ 


O O O O O о о о о 


© 0000000 о 


o 


Imperial Shuttle Power Cell Chargers 


John Paui Lona 


35 


they accommodated two full wings of TIEs, while 
most Star Destroyer TIE fighter bays only hold half 
of a wing. 

Pilots climb across a complicated gridwork 
above the racks to reach thcir starfighters. They 
enter the TIEs through ceiling hatches, and when 
they give the ready signal the rack disengages and 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Four ——— —— STAR 
ARS 


drops the TIE into the waiting repulsorfield below. 
This field maneuvers the startighter to the bay 
opening where powerful tractor beams take over 
and catapult the TIEs into space. It isn't until this 
moment that a TIE's own engines kickin. Until then, 
the pilot is at the mercy of the control tower. À 
similar process occurs again on re-entry. 


With АП These TIEs, Why Did We Win at Yavin? 


А young pilot raised his hand as Wedge 
Antilles paused in his discussion of Imperial 
starfighter tactics employed at the Battle of 
Yavin. “Sir,” the young pilot began, "if the 
Death Star carried so many TIE fighters, how 
did our side happen to win the battle?" 

Wedge smiled, unconsciously brushing his 
dark hair back with his hand. "That's a good 
question. To tell you the truth, we won be- 
cause the Death Star never launched more 
than a squadron against us." 

The room full of pilots gasped and immedi- 
ately began talking among themselves. Wedge 
let them carry on for a few minutes, then he 
called the class back to order. “From our 
investigations, it appears that Grand Moff 
Tarkin never issued an order to launch his 
TIE fighters. He was content to employ the 


station’s turbolaser towers against the Alli- 
ance starfighters. That goes back to our ear- 
lier discussion about Imperial overconfi- 
dence." 

The young pilot raised his hand again. “If 
Tarkin didn't order the TIEs into space, who 
did?" 

Wedge's eyes leaped nervously around 
the room before settling back on the young 
pilot. “The squadron that came after us that 
day was none other than Lord Darth Vader's 
personal squadron. It engaged us inthetrench, 
following after our lead ships and trying to 
blast them before they could fire at the ex- 
haust port. We may have still won the day if 
all of the TIEs had taken to space, but it sure 
would have been alot more crowded over the 
Death Star.” 


ТА В Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Four 


"WA 


Namsed асу 


TIE Fighter 
Rack 


p 


Pilot Crawlway 
"d 


TIE Fighter 


ess Р 


P 
GH 
Ш 
- 
i] ft and 
1 
F 
d 
Bee 
(itis 
sn 


HANGAR BAYS DIAGRAM 
TIE Hangar Bay 62-N9 


Magnetic Forcefield 


mE nm nm uu uL 
1 БЕН ШЕН ПШ 


Control Tower -—— 


Ц 
Li 
T 
_— En 
ТЇЇ 
E 
1 
HI 
LI 


pon 


SH 


Omitted 

Beyond This 

Point For 
ighter 


Crawlways 
TIE Fighter 
Berths 


(one per 
(72 per bay) 


TIE 


37 


Space Traffic Control 


Every hangar bay was staffed by a control 
team. This team monitored the approach and 
departure of all craft into and out of their particu- 
lar hangar. They, in turn, reported to and re- 
ceived orders from a main control tower that 
monitored all space traffic in its given zone (as 
defined by its active bridge). 

Each control tower contained sensor relays, 
flight tracking screens, ship-to-tower communi- 
cations capabilities, tractor beam and repulsorlift 
controls, and the consoles for regulating the 
bay's magnetic field. 

In addition, the tower commanded a complete 
staff of maintenance personnel, emergency medi- 
cal teams, and flight support personnel and 
Droids. 

Control towers relayed all data about incom- 
ing and outgoing ships to the zone’s Space Traffic 
Control Center, located in the zone’s bridge 
sprawl. The control center had the difficult job of 
coordinating open spacc above the zonc. 


Maintenance 


On the decks below and around the latitude 
hangar bays were the vehicle maintenance shops. 
Sooner or later every vessel, from TIE fighters to 
strike cruisers, will need to have some bit of 
damage repaired, or to undergo a routine over- 
haul or tune up. Lifts inevery bay lowered craft 
either directly into a waiting shop or toarepulsor 


АДА YZ, أ‎ 
“at, 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter FOU нинин ГДЕ 
WARS” 


shaft which connected to a shop. In these shops, 
trained maintenance crew and Droids cleaned 
carbon buildup, changed components, over- 
hauled engines, replaced worn or damaged parts, 
and otherwise worked to keep the Death Star's 
catried craft in tip-top shape. 


Storage Docks 


Each hangar bay's vertical lifts led into repulsor 
shafts that tunneled deep into the battle station. 
Below each zone were several storage docks. 

Ships were sent to the storage docks when 
there was going to be a substantial wait before 
the next mission. Each storage dock was built 
into the crust of thc Death Star, and was crewcd 
by afull complement of ship technicians, weapon 
technicians, and service Droids. Upon arrival at 
a dock, the ship was given the same treatment 
that was received at a maintenance shop. Sup- 
plies were replenished, weapons were run 
through full diagnostics, short duration parts 
were replaced and many other basic maintc- 
nance actions were routinely performed. На ship 
had been damaged, all but the most difficult 
repairs could be affected in the storage docks. In 
addition, any system overhauls, such as replace- 
ment of a weapon system, was performed at the 
storage docks. 

After being thoroughly inspected and ap- 
proved by the crew of technicians, the ship was 
moved into the storage area of the docks, to 
await its next mission. 


4 


Luz 
Ea 


(atto = 
K e УРА, 
75 om ^ 


im 
AB 
| · 
SS 


wm. 


2 4^) 


Johr Paul Lona 


— T AR‘ [Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Four 
ق‎ 


а E EE 


SURE 
у ЖИТДИ, 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Four Á ee 


40 


Deep Storage 

Within the bowels of the battle station were the 
deep storage hangar bays. These bays held the 
Death Star's complement of land vehicles, backup 
shuttles and starfighters, and any vessels not in 
use for an extended period. The vehicles were 
stored within stasis fields, which kept the craft in 
perfect condition. No dust or vermin could get at a 
craft as long as its stasis field remained intact. 
These fields were regularly checked to determine 
integrity, and security guarded these deep storage 
bays with the same dedication shown to armories. 

A deep storage bay was like a spacecraft mu- 
seum. Ships floated effortlessly within a cloud of 
glowing blue light. Repulsor-generated antigrav 
fields were projected into a deep storage bay 
when a ship was called out of storage. The field 
moved a ship out of stasis and into a repulsor 
shaft. From there it could be transported to a 
latitude surface hangar anywhere within the battle 
station. 


Tractor Beams 


In addition to the small tractor beam projectors 
that directed traffic into and out of the hangars, 
each zone featured 24 heavy-duty tractor beam 
emplacements for use against enemy craft. Each 
zone could concentrate from one to all 24 emplace- 
шешз оп a зінше Largel, crealing a bubble of 
energy to capture a target. À ship must create a 
thrust greater than the strength of the bubble to 


ARS 


break free. In game terms, a tractor beam must 
hit its target to capture it in the bubble of energy 
(use the fire control plus the capital ship gunnery 
skill). To escape from the tractor beam, the tar- 
get ship must make an opposed hull code roll 
versus the tractor beam's damage (also known 
as its Strength). For complete information on the 
use of tractor beams, see page 110 of Star Wars: 
The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition. 

Several tractor beams may work together to 
capture and hold a ship. This is conducted under 
the "Combined Actions" rules on pages 68-70 of 
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition. 

To disengage a zone's tractor beam emplace- 
ments, a character must locate one of the seven 
terminals where the tractor beam is coupled to 
the main reactor. An Easy security roll at one of 
theterminals causes a power loss that will not be 
noticed until the next duty check, thus disengag- 
ing the zone's tractor beam emplacements. 


168 Tractor Beam Emplacements* 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Crew: 6 
Scale: Capital 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Body: 5D (capital scale) 
Fire Control: 3D 
Space Range: 1-5/10/25 
Damage: 5D 


* 24 per zone. Fire separately or combine 
fire in groups of up to 24. 


Death Star Technical Com 


m 


To your stations. To your stations. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Five 


ЕШ Chapter Five 


42 


AR... 
ARS _ 


General Sector 


The general sector of the battle station was 
made up of non-restricted areas which were open 
to all members of the crew. This area included 
the many kilometers of corridors and access 
ways, mess halls, rec rooms, turbolift cluster 
stations, and living areas. These areas were rep- 
licated again and again all throughout a zone. 
The majority of space within each city sprawl 
was dedicated to the general sector, and under 
most conditions (Defstat Zero and Defstat One) 
there was virtually free access to all general 
sector areas. Battle Station Operations was re- 
sponsible for the regular maintenance and op- 
eration of general sector areas. 

Stormtroopers and security personnel regu- 
larly patrolled the endless maze of corridors, 
watching for signs of trouble. Crew were seen 
coming and going, on their way to and from duty 
stations during the Death Star's endless work 
shifts. Countless numbers of Droids raced through 
this sector, performing any number of tasks for 
their biological commanders. It was the one area 
where officers and crew met on almost equal 
footing, passing one another on their way to 
more important parts of the battle station. 


Turbolift Cluster Station 


Onc couldn’t walk more than a few hundred 
meters without bumping into some kind of 
turbolift conveyance, but even more impressive 
were the scores upon scores of turbolift cluster 
stations found all over the battle station. The 
turbolift conveyance system made use of the 
most common form of technology available in 
the galaxy repulsorlift ficld gcncrators. By 
filling long stretches of cylindrical shafts with 
repulsor fields, the designers created a travel 
system that connected all portions of the Death 
Star. Turbolift cars reach incredible speeds within 
a repulsor field, covering many kilometers per 
minute. They also performed the much-needed 
task of gravity transition orientation through the 
use of gravity compensators and rotating cars. 


Turbolift cars were activated by voice com- 
mand. Repulsor shafts crisscrossed the massive 
battle station in all directions, and all shafts 
connected somewhere within the Death Star. Ша 
crewman entered a turbolift anywhere on the 
battle station, he could have directed it to take 
him to any other location aboard the Death Star. 
Turbolifts extended into the surface city sprawls, 
but even with the large number of cars available 
and the great speeds that they reached, it was 
often faster aud iore convenient to lake ashutule 
from one hangar bay to a bay nearer the final 
destination. 

Some areas of the station were off limits to 
certain crew designations and ranks. If a crew- 
man requested a turbolift car to take him to an 
area that was either closed to his classification or 
required a specific rauk cylinder key [0 access, 
the car simply refused to move. If the requested 
destination was particularly sensitive, the 
turbolift computer informed security of the re- 
quest. To bypass this security access in Imperial 
facilities, a Moderate to Difficult security roll is 
necessary, depending on the nature of the desti- 
пацоп. Failure simply means the car refuses to 
move. Failure by half the difficulty number or 
more alerts security and two security guards 
come to investigate. 


Crew and Officer Mess Halls 


The crew and officers of the Death Star shared 
a basic need for food and water. However, the 
accommodations for each were vastly different. 
The crew ate in a large, open room full of tables 
and benches. Meal trays were delivered by Druids, 
and the fare was cultivated from the Death Star’s 
own food and water synthesization plants. Meals 
were taken during a crewman's scheduled shift. 
Each member of the crew was entitled to two 
meal shifts a day. 

Officers dined in relative comfort. The officer 
mcss halls featured more secluded dining facilities 


—PARBLIIILILL———————Á— Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Еме 


"WA 


than the crew counterpart. Service was provided 
by biological food handlers, and while there were 
scheduled meal shifts even for officers, there were 
three shifts and the rules were more lenient. Ma- 
jors and higher-ranking officers could usually eat 
wherever and whenever they desired. The food 
served to officers came from the huge stores of 
refrigerated and dried goods brought aboard by 
Imperial cargo ships, instead of the battle station 
synthesization plants. Only during strict periods of 
rationing or at an officer's specific request was 
synthefood served in an officers’ mess hall. 


Rec Rooms 


From vast exercise chambers boasting the 
latest in health and fitness equipment to special- 
ized recreational sport courts. the Death Star 
had more than enough ways to keep the crew in 
shape and to entertain them during their free 
shifts. A typical recreation area consisted of a 
main Chamber filled with rumning lacks, weight 
training machines, calisthenic and aerobic train- 
ing space, martial arts sparring areas, and other 
personal exercise stations. Side chambers fea- 
tured lockers and sonic showers, holo obstacle 


GENERAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Turbolift Cluster 


Open Shaft 


Cathlesn Hunter 


43 


АРВ 
ARS 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Five 


GENERAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Crew Living Quarters 


Triple-Tier 
Bunks 


7 


[ 11) 
До AS 


4 МЕ 4 
6 


М. „Ах. Дх. Дх Ау‏ 11 ا 
IS „А „4‏ 


РИЧИ ЧС XU 


60 

سد 

696 ) 
С о о a 


66 
„Ам А 
6 
Al 


Ж. 


99 
ДЫ У. 
68 
AS 


SI 


Le 
~ 


Toilets Closets Sonic 
Showers 
GENERAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 


Crew Mess Hall 


Storage 


Kitchen 


Food and 
Beverage 
Preparation 


Droid Storage 
and Power Charge 
Stations 


and Benches 


инаб Т AR Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Five 
SEE EEO оратор сларіег rive 


and combat training simulation facilities, equip- 
ment and exercise Droid storage, refreshment 
bars, multi-purpose sport courts, and recreation 
staff offices. 

While every member of the crew was encour- 
aged to make use of the personal exercise equip- 
ment, everyone was periodically assigned to the 
obstacle and combat training facilities to keep 
their edge or to master new techniques. The 
obstacle course featured an endless number of 
terrain and situation programs that created holo- 
graphic representations to tcst the limits of abil- 
ity and ingenuity. Combat training provided 
blaster, grenade and heavy weapons refresher 
courses, lessons in melee weapons for those so 
inclined or specifically assigned such instruc- 
tion, and the use of both biological and mechani- 
cal opposition for sparring and war game simula- 
tions. 

The entire crew was tested and evaluated in 
physical training, personal and duty station weap- 
ons skills, martial arts, and obstacle reflexes at 
least once every quarter. In times of crisis, these 
evaluations were more frequent as the officers 
strived to reach maximum perfection scores for 
their departments. 


Refreshment bars featured a healthy liquid 
refreshment that returned vital fluids and vita- 
mins lost after a strenuous workout. The sport 
courts could becontigured foruse with any of the 
more popular games including wallball, kel tag 
and repulsor puck. 


Living Quarters 


Living quarters aboard the Death Star ranged 
from spartan barracks for the crew to multi-room 
luxury apartments for the senior officers. Lower 
officers, such as lieutenants, shared their quar- 
ters with as many as three other officers of like 
rank, Higher officers received private quarters. 
The crew quarters bunked as шапу as 50 indi- 
viduals in a room, but some crew members re- 
ceived preferential treatment. Combat pilots and 
highly-skilled technical crew received better liv- 
ing conditions than the average service tech or 
lab assistant. 


Assembly Rooms 


Each city sprawl had at least one assembly 
room, normally near the living quarters. The 
assembly rooms were used Гог large combat 


45 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Five 


Corridor 


Personal 
Exercise 
Stations <] 


Corridor 


Machines 


Turbolift 
"e Cluster 


Ke 


Showers/ Offices 


Lockers 


= 


ХА 


Calisthenics 


Area 
Ne Sere P 


Cluster 


Refreshment 
Bar 


GENERAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Rec Room Facilities 


Droids & 


Equipment 


Sparring Courts 


JN 


Aerobic 
Area 


Refreshment 
Bar 


Holo Obstacle 


& Comba 
Simu 


Training 
tion 
Motility 
Track 
(Elevated) 


р! Multi-Purpose 
Sports Courts 


Repulsor Tube 
to Track 


Showers/ 


Lockers 
(C 
X 


Turbolift CJ AQ 


Cluster OX: 
L 


John Faul Lona 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Five 


sS TA 
"WA 


GENERAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Officer Living Area 


Typical 
Majors' Quarters 


г] 
| Living Room Showet 


(7 Holo Display Bathroom 


&nnic 
Shower 


Typical 
Lieutenants' Quarters 


Cathleen Hunter | 


GENERAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Officer Mess Hall 


Dry Goods 
Storage 


о 


40! Dining E 


9 Kitchen 


Cathleen Hunter 


Refrigerated 
Goods Storage 


47 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Five D ГА Pa 


48 


training classes, and addresses by officers and 
visiting dignitaries. The assembly rooms also 
had several smaller rooms in adjacent corridors 
that were used for entertainment and relaxation: 
soldiers could see holo-vid programming from 
the Core Worlds, read trans-novels, see motiva- 
tional holo-vids from Imperial command, as well 
as get updates on happenings throughout tlie 
Empire through the imperial Intormation Com- 
mittee (a sub-branch of the Media Branch of the 
Ubiqtorate). These smaller rooms were an excel- 
lentlocation for Imperial personneltorelax while 
still being under the careful observation of Secu- 
rity Sector. 


Using the General Sector in 
the Roleplaying Game 


The general sector is perhaps the easiest area 
to incorporate into a roleplaying game adven- 
ture. Turbolifts are the most common form of 
convcyance in both Imperial and Alliance capital 
ships, space stations, and even planet-bound 
complexes. Whole scenarios can be built around 
capturing or defending a particularly important 
turbolift cluster, or a single scene could occur 


ARS 


here as it does in А New Hope when Luke and 
Han, disguised as stormtroopers, usea lift to take 
their Wookiee "prisoner" to the detention block. 
Think of the possibilities had the crewman they 
waved away not heeded them or noticed that one 
of the stormtroopers was a bit shorter than the 
standard height ... 

More than eating and sleeping can occurinthe 
mess halls and living quarters of Imperial officers 
and crew. Meeting with Alliance sympathizers or 
deep-cover spies to receive vital information is 
best accamplished in areas where the crew nor- 
mally comes together. The Imperial troops аге a 
disciplined lot, but they still need recreation, so 
it would be possible to come across intense 
sabaac games in the barracks. The officers mess 
and living quarters can even be used when you 
needa diagram of a high-class restaurant or hotel 
for a Star Wars adventure 

There are many places to situate a rec room 
besides the interior of the Death Star. Hotels, 
space stations, luxury space liners, capital ships, 
and even Rebel or Imperial bases feature some 
level of recreation facilities for the characters to 
explore, over hear rumors, spy on relaxing Impe- 
rials ar even get into a gaod, old-fashioned hrawl 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


= ТА 


ШШ Chapter Six 


Service and Technical 


Sectors 


Service and technical sector staff share a com- 
mon job profile — both sectors served a major 
and vital support function aboard the Death Star. 
Because ot this similarity, both sections are cov- 
ered in this datafile. 


Service Sector 


Serviceencompassed those areas of the battle 
station rarely seen by the rest of the crew. The 
kilometers of maintenance tunnels, accessways, 
trash compactors and ventilation ducts were the 
domain ofthe service sector. Service technicians 
spent the bulk of their duty time inspecting, 
maintaining, repairing and replacing machinery. 
From highly-skilled technicians trained to build 
components from scratch, to almost-mindless 
Droids programmed to clean corridors, service 
is one of the most taken for granted sectors in 
almost any operation and the Death Star was no 
exception. If something works or if an area is 
clean, well, that's just the way it's supposed to 
be. If it isn't, then an officer wants to know why. 

When service techs were not busy performing 
repairs or routine maintenance on the battle 
station's machinery, they were on duty at moni- 
toring posts checking temperature and perfor- 
mance readings or waiting for system failure 
alarms to sound. All machinery was installed 
with built-in diagnostic systems which fed per- 
formance information to the monitors in mainte- 
nance. These readings measured such things as 
coolant levels, air quality, noise output, heat 
generation, and ascore of otherindications which 
were constantly compared to factory norms. Any 
significant dips or rises in the average resulted In 
warning sensors sounding to alert on-duty techs 
to make a more detailed investigation. 

There are several standardized service Droids 
that are found throughout the Empire (civilian 
versions of these Droids are also common). The 
two basic service Droids are the MN-2E and the 
SPD-R4. The MN-2E is a tread-driveu model ca- 
pable of performing detailed and delicate repairs 


with its sensitive manipulators. It is equipped 
with magnifying visual scanners for precision 
work, and a variety of low-powered lasers for 
welding and cutting. The SPD-R4 spider Droid 
uses its highly-bendable appendages to navigate 
power cores and engine blocks, literally going 
where a human cannot go to effect repairs or 
perform normal upkeep. The service sector was 
responsible for keeping these Droids well main- 
tained. 

Service also handled the care and monitoring 
of the MSE-6 general purpose Droids which 
swarmed across every deck of the battle station. 
These Droids performed such functions as secu- 
rity checks, message delivery, machinery inspec- 
tions, and even pest control. They were also 
routinely sent into ventilation ducts to inspect 
damage from mynock infestations and to drive 
off the unwanted vermin. 

Perhaps the most important job to fall to the 
service sector was the upkeep of the station's 
protective and emergency gear. All corridors 
and duty stations contained hidden but easily- 
accessible emergency equipment that had to be 
replaced or charged with power on a regular 
basis. À standard emergency gear locker con- 
tained breath masks, environmental suits, food 
and water rations, glow rods, location beacons, 
laser cutters, comlinks and temporary environ- 
ment pouches. In case of hull rupture, personnel 
who cannot get to an escape pod could place 
themselves in the pouches and survive the breach 
of space for a short period of time. A pouch’s 
artificial environment deteriorates within 12 
hours 

A typical maintenance section within a sprawl 
featured a series of connected repair stations, a 
storage warehouse full of spare parts, monitor- 
ing stations which received continual diagnostic 
reports and could hook into a Droid's visual 
sensors, and machinery for repairing worn com- 
ponents or even constructing new components 
from raw materials. 


49 


ГЕ 
БН 


Waste Removal 


Service was alsoresponsiblefortrash removal 
and processing. Each corridor and room has a 
trash disposal chute that led into a waste collec- 
tion bin (one for each sprawl). There, Droids 
would break the materials down into different 
categories of recyclable goods (plastics, metal, 
food, water) as well as unrecyclable waste. 

The usable materials were sent for processing 
to manufacturing centers within the zone or to 
the bulk storage and replication sections deep 
within the Death Star. 

The rest was sent through long waste chutes 
to one of the numerous trash compactors for 
cach zonc. During thc rescuc of Princess Lcia 
from the Death Star's detention block, the prin- 
cess blasted into just such a waste chute. The 
trash would then be compacted intothe smallest 
possible size and then moved to a jettison com- 
partment along one of the trenches. Each of the 
bins and compactors was magnetically sealed so 
that waste matcrials wouldn't Ісак into ncarby 
compartments. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six —  ——— НАНЫНАН. ur ү. жш 
WARS” 


Like many starships, the waste collection bins 
and trash compactors of the Death Star were 
infested with Dianoga, commonly known as the 
garbage squid. They are known to consume ev- 
crything except for pure metals. On board the 
Death Star, the Dianoga are both numerous and 
hugecomparedtothosefound onother starships. 


Technical Sector 


Thetechnicians serving aboard the Death Star 
who were not part of the service sector filled 
roles in the technical sector. Here, crew worked 
in the many science stations, medical bays, re- 
search laboratories, programming facilities and 
enginecring sections that served the battle sta 
tion. 

Science and research are underutilized fields 
within the Empire during this period of civil war. 
Indeed, since the rise of Emperor Palpatine and 
his New Order, science and research grants not 
specifically assigned to the war effort have un- 
dergone drastic fiscal cuts. A token force of sci 


SERVICE AND TECHNICAL SECTORS DIAGRAM 
Maintenance Section 19-S2 


Turbolift Doors 
Turbolift 


Vertical Shaft 


O 
O 


Plasma Forge 
Maintenance 


Station 


Laser Lathe 


Monitoring 
Screens 


OO 


Cargo Skiff 


di 


Turbolift 
Horizontal Shaft 


Computer 
Repair 


Cathizen Hunter 


STA 
"АМА 


SERVICE AND TECHNICAL SECTORS DIAGRAM 
Representative Death Star Technical Uniforms 


Medical Technician 


ence and research labs had been allocated to the 
Death Star, and while a few did get to engage in 
pure knowledge advancing experiments, most 
were put to work designing power output en- 
hancements for weapons and engines, or even 
assigned the task of new weapon development. 

Asthe Death Star was primarily an instrument 
of war, much effort was directed to keeping the 
men who served the battle station healthy and fit 
during non combat periods, and rcpairing thc 
injured during war. A typical medical bay was 
staffed by medical technicians of varying rank 
and ability, and by Droids that specialized in 
medical techniques. Medical bays featured large 
open chambers that served as either examina- 
tion rooms or operating theaters. These cham- 
bers contained diagnostic examination platforms 
and operating tables, and each could be parti- 
tioned to form three private rooms. Bacta tank 
wards had healing units for up to 16 patients. 
‘These restorative baths remained the fastest and 
most effective methods of healing, but were held 
for use by only the most seriously injured pa- 
tients. Less lethal injuries were treated and the 
patients were sent to recuperation wards. Life- 


Service Technician 


threatening injuries were handled by a special 
intensive care ward which combined bacta tank 
treatments with lite-support machinery. Medical 
Droids currently in Imperial service are the Emdee 
series of diagnostic, laboratory technician and 
micrasurgery mechanicals. 

Droids made up a huge portion of the Death 
Star’s crew complement. The task of servicing 
the mechanicals fell to the service sector, but the 
task of programming was the domain ot the tech- 
nical sector crew. The spectrum of jobs handled 
by Droids aboard the battle station was as vast as 
the number of different models employed. Some 
Droids aided science research and the medical 
bays. Others worked in engineering and techni- 
cal services. Another group handled service tasks 
such as translation, protocol, and domestic as- 
signments. A select corps of mechanicals worked 
with the security and military sectors. Finally, a 
huge number of Droids were assigned to menial 
labor, transportation, and sanitation applications. 
All required programming, and the department 
of technical services filled that important func- 
tion. In addition, the technical sector is respon- 
sible for the programming necessary to operate 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


51 


John PaulLona 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six ————ssá——— STAR 
RS 


A 


SERVICE AND TECHNICAL SECTORS DIAGRAM 
Representative Death Star Droids 


A e У 


мама AX 
1/5) 


Cargo Load Lifter 


Factory Droid 


ym 


Note: Droids are not shown to scale. 


52 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


Worker Droid 


AES —M 


Maintenance Droid 


53 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


54 


the Death Star's integrated computer systems. 
Engineering, another department within tech- 
nical services, had the sole assignment of keep- 
ing the battle station's sublight and hyperdrive 
engines in working order. While it was but one 
task, it was a demanding and vital one. Engine 
blocks were located along the Death Star's equa- 
tor and at its poles, providing the thrust to move 
themassive vessel through space. Sublight drives 
moved the Death Star through realspace. While 
many types and models of sublight engines exist, 
the Death Star employed a series of ion engines 
that converted power cell output into fusion 
reaction particles. Thisenergy, whenhurled from 
the Death Star's engine ports, produced enough 
thrust to propel the station through the void. 
Untortunately, ion particles are highly radioac- 
tive, and powerful vents were employed to force 
the radiation out of the drive stations and into 
space. Even so, engineers routinely wore protec- 


tive gear to ward off radiation spillage. 

Hyperdrives, by contrast, are considered much 
"cleaner" than their sublight drive counterparts, 
but they also require more powerto hurl their host 
beyond light speed. They threw the battle station 
into a dimension called hyperspacc, а dimension 
coterminous with realspace that at the same time 
operates under a different set of physical laws. 
Only by employing sophisticated astrogation com- 
puters and accurate and timely astrogation charts 
couldthe battlestation hopeto navigate hyperspace 
safely. 

System-specific operator Droids, modelled af- 
ter starfighter astromechs, were plugged into sta- 
tions throughout the battle station. These Droids 
assisted in astrogation, diagnostics, piloting, and 
most other tasks also assigned to human crew on 
the Death Star. Without these Droids, the battle 
station would have needed perhaps twice as many 
biological crew than it normally employed. 


John Раш Lona 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


Johr Paul Lona 


55 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


Medical 


Dividable 
Exam Room 


SERVICE AND TECHNICAL SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Medical Station 381-N3 


To Recuperation 


Dividabl 
Operating 


Room 
-A | 


Medical 
Officer 
Station 


х у Obser vatiuii 
Turbolift -f Droid 


Cluster Я Stations 


Bacta Tank Ward 


To Intensive 
Care Ward 


fob Caswell 


STA 
"WA 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


SERVICE AND TECHNICAL SECTORS DIAGRAM 
Sublight Drive Station D-639 


(о) ИКО S eS MM СУ 
и ао D 


i К" LEL. 
9740) а 


Sublight 


© 249 A Si Drive 
Ga 1 — Unit 
SS 


Power І evel 
Monitoring 


Turbolift 


Cluster Turbolift 
Cluster 


Engineer Office Auxiliary Helm 


‘AR... 
ARS 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Six 


SERVICE AND TECHNICAL SECTORS DIAGRAM 
Hyperdrive Station A-226 
Astrogation/Hyperdrive 
Computers 


Hyperdrive 
Unit 


Power 

Shaft 

Turbolift | (Horizontal) 
E Power Cure / 

а | Access Platform Engine Core 

N [Vertical Shaft} 


Control Station 


Hyperdrive 
Unit 


Astrogation/Hyperdrive 
Computers 


John Paul Lona 


STA Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven 


Ell Chapter Seven 
Military Sector 


Those areas under the command of the mili- 
tary sector included armory stores, weapons 
stations, and tactical planning and observation 
rooms — the war rooms. Strictly speaking, all 
personnel on board the battle station were mili- 
tary. The Empire is, more than anything else, a 
military organization. For purposes of duty as- 
signments and command hierarchy, specific por- 
tions of the battle station were deemed military 
sectors because of their status as battle ready. 


The Imperial Army 


Since the rise of the New Order, the Imperial 
Army has become а powerful tool inthe Emperor’s 
arsenal. The Army's mission on the Death Star 
encompassed drop missions to planet surfaces 
when the battle station was assigned to suppress 
anuprising. Withthe bombardment support avail- 
able from the superlaser, the Army expected 
each mission to be relatively quick and easy. 

Army troopers wear gray helmets and uni- 
lorms, and they have partial body armor avail- 
able when the situation calls for it. All officers are 
required to wear Бойу armor when in the field, no 
matter how simple the operation seems to be. 
The basic training a trooper undergoes teaches 
him to fight and fight well. He is not taught to 
think for himself or to devise tactics — that’s 
what officers are for. But he is taught all manner 
of combat techniques, not limited to but includ- 
inghand-to-hand camhat, blaster pistol, grenade, 
and heavy weapons use. As drop missions were 
rare aboard the Death Star, there was only a 
small contingent of troopers on board. These 
soldiers were selected for their ability to learn 
secondary skills, and all undergo additional train- 
ing which will allow them to take on in-space 
tasks to keep busy between drop missions 

The land assauit trooper is a specialized sol- 
dier trained to work in tangent with surface at- 
tack vehicles. As the Death Star carries a signifi- 
cant amount of this type of craft, the Army must 
maintain the personnel to usethem. Land assault 


troopers wear impact-absorbing uniforms, envi- 
ronmental gear, sensor-equipped helmets, and 
partial body armor. Each soldier is trained to 
operate a variety of land war machines, in addi- 
tion to the usual training all Army combat troops 
receive. 

Army personnel maintained their own armor 
ies and vehicle bays throughout the Death Star. 


The Imperial Navy 


The Imperial Navy remains the cornerstone of 
the Empire’s power. It moves through space in 
massive war ships, swiftly dispensing the will of 
the Emperor wherever he demands. The Death 
Star, for all of the effort made to make it a joint 
forces venture, was a Naval facility. A specific 
branch of the Navy had been created to pilot and 
maintain the battle station. This branch fell un- 
der the heading of Battle Station Operations. All 
personnel serving in this branch, from techni- 
cians to gunners to astrogators to pilots, hail 
from the Navy. To the best of our knowledge, this 
branch remains active despite the Death Star’s 
destruction. 

Naval officers stationed on the active bridges 
issued orders pertaining to course corrections, 
headings, and a thousand other incidentals. Na- 
val crew operated the numerous consoles and 
duty stations that turned the orders into actions. 

The distinctive uniform of the Death Star 
trooper marked these multi-talented individuals 
as the select force of Grand Moff Tarkin. Tarkin 
envisioned a new type of soldier to protect his 
ultimate weapon. These men weretrained during 
the construction phase of the battle station, be- 
ing molded and re-built as the Death Star was 
being put together. Besides the normal training 
all cambat farces undergo, the Death Star troop- 
ers received advanced special forces training to 
make them a step above the average soldier. 
They were even given the distinct privilege of 
receiving independent command training so that 
they could react and adapt to changing situa- 


59 


tions. But Tarkin demanded that this indepen- 
dence be tempered with devotion, fierce loyalty 
to the New Order, and the need to obey any 
command issued by a ranking officer. Tarkin's 
vision wasobvious —the more powerfula weapon 
is inside, the more powerful the punch it delivers 
on the outside. Death Star troopers were issued 
uniforms made to symbolize Tarkin's doctrine of 
fear. 

Death Star gunners were culled from the best 
fightingunitsinthe galaxy, assembled to operate 
the gun towers and defend against large scale 
assault. Gunners are usually pilots-in-training or 
pilots who failed to quality for flight assignment. 
Trained to work as a group, gunners specialize in 
unified fire and probability-generated spread 
patterns. This training was perfectly suited for 
the defensive requirements of the Death Star, 
and the gunners were taught to blanket the Death 
Star іп a defensive net of blaster fire. The highest- 
ranking and best trained gunners were assigned 
to the superlaser. 

Finally, the Navy would not be what it is with- 
out the vast number of starfighter-class pilots 
who have come up through the ranks. Unlike the 
officers, who command the vast capital ships or 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven Ý Үү ү. ү - жиш 
WARST 


battle stations like the Death Star, a starfighter 
pilot must be a hands-on flyer. It is the starfighter 
pilot who crawls into a flight cockpit, takes the 
controls in his hands, and launches his ship into 
space. Lightning reflexes, superb training, and 
creative thought are common traits among the 
elite starfighter pilots. These pilots operate 
shuttles, patrol craft and assault ships, but the 
best of the bunch fly the dreaded TIE fighters. 


Stormtroopers 


Mysterious and highly-visible, stormtroopers 
are encased in protective armor and wield pow- 
erful personal weapons. They are an elite branch 
of shock troops which support the Army and 
Navy while remaining separate from both. The 
Emperor personally requested that a place be 
made for stormtroopers aboard the Death Star, 
and these specialized soldiers worked their way 
into all areas of the battle station. Their job was 
to assist in ground assaults and battle station 
security, but no one doubts that they were in 
place to enforce compliance with the will of the 
Emperor if an officer decided to ignore the poli- 
cies of the New Order. 


D TA 
"УМА 


MILITARY SECTOR DIAGRAM 


Corridor 


Turbolifts 


Corridor 


Armories 


Each branch ofthe military maintained its own 
armory stores throughout the Death Star. Armor- 
ies contained a wealth of weapons, ammunition 
and protective gear, ready to be dispensed at a 
moment’s notice. Blaster pistols and rifles, gre- 
nades (including smoke, stun and destructive 
varieties), heavy weapons (such as mounted la- 
ser cannons), melee weapons (like force pikes) 
and body armor were typically stored behind 
locked blast doors, along with the necessary 
power cells. Armories were guarded at all times, 
and a dispensation officer was always on duty. 
Larger armories, connected to nearby hangar 
bays via lifts, hcld the Army's land combat vc- 
hicles, including AT-AT  walkers and 
repulsortanks. À central amory stored replace- 
ment engines, weapons, and whole sections of 
vehicles. These parts could be brought into a 
zone's armory via the vast network of repulsor 
shafts. 

Armories were monitored by security remotes 
and guarded by a squad of soldiers from the 
particular military branch maintaining it. All doors 
into armories feature locks which required a 
Difficult security roll to open. In addition, internal 
alarms were set off if a piece of equipment was 


Duty Post 
Battle 


Boards 


War Room 


АЈА dt e C 


Consoles 


Viewscreen 


"P" Floor 
Communications Screen 


removed from its storage bay without entering 
the proper code (Moderate security roll to by- 
pass). Failing to enter the proper code set off an 
alarmthat dropped the armory's blast doorsinto 
place (Difficult security rol to орет) and alerted 
two additional squads to investigate the area. 


The War Room 


When the Death Star entered combat, the 
entire station switched to Defstat 3. Duringthese 
times, the tactical planning and observation sta- 
tions wereactivated. Theseareas, generally called 
the war rooms, contained everything needed to 
plan and monitor a specific battle. There was one 
war room in cach zonc of thc station. 

In the war rooms, large transparent battle 
boards tracked the activities of friendly and en- 
emy forces astechnicians and computers worked 
together to analyze attack patterns and develop 
effective counter-strategies. Communications 
personnel monitored all communications activ- 
ity between both sides of the conflict, often break 
ing enemy codes with relative ease. They were 
also equipped to issue updated orders as the 
Officers designed new tactics to deal with the 
ongoing conflict. 


continued on page 66 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven 


61 


Cathleen Hunter 


АВ 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven 
Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter STAR 


MILITARY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Representative Death Star Army Uniforms 


b 


کے 


Officer in Field Armor Trooper in Field Armor 


Trooper | and Assault Trooper Stormtrooper* 


* Technically a separate branch 


62 


— А  — —— — ——ÉÀ—Ó—ÓÓ———— eath Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven 
WA 


MILITARY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Representative Death Star Navy Uniforms 


Death Star Gunner 


" 


Starfighter Pilot Naval Crew 


63 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven seenen E DE 


Twin Laser Barrels 


Laser Actuator 


Energy Coupler 


Turbine 
Generators 


Tracking & 
Targeting С ~~ 
Computers 


ARS 


MILITARY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Turbolaser Tower 


/777” Rotating Gun Turret 


Cooling Unit 


Swivel Mounting 


Capacitor 
Banks 


Power Core 


Support Crew 
and Maintenance 


Gunnery Crew 
Slalions 


meters 


Rob Caswell 


ЯТА. Сезіп Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven 
WA 


MILITARY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Superlaser Firing Station 


Laser 
Crystal 


Open Tunnel 
Cannon \ 


Laer Cooling System 


Actuator 


Beam Travel 
Tube 


Power - Y ius и 
Generator U 7 E M. View- 


E x "ei | 
Targeting pe ІІ | | | 
Computers M | | | 


screen 


|= 
[E 


Е \ Gunnery and 


Systems Computers | Systems Monitor 
Stations 


Superlaser Specifications laser 


Crystal 
Laser F 
„Focus 


Crystal x bans 
E Amplification 


^ Nexus 
Amplification "е Ж 


Crystal 


Superlaser 
Beam 


^ Laser Beam 
Focus Lens 
("The Eye”) Е : 
Front View Side View 


Ro» Caswell 


The main station in the war room was the 
massive tactical floor screen, which constantly 
showed the position of the Death Star and its 
relationship to its own support craft and enemy 
forces. The screen also showed the range and 
targeting field for the superlaser, highlighting 
those participants in the theater of operation 
that could be targeted by the massive weapon. 

Two squads of Death Star troopers monitored 
security within each war room. 


Weapons Stations 


Weapons stations were any of the numerous 
weapons emplacements that formed the Death 
Star's basic defense network. Most of liese tuok 
the form of turbolaser towers, but there were a 
number of torpedo ports and the superlaser was 
considered a weapon station as well. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven —ÓM À— ——H——— STAR 
——ÓÓ————————— WARS" 


Turbolaser Tower 


À typical turbolaser tower featured four dis- 
tinct sections housed within an armored hull. 
The top section, housing the gun turret, rotated 
in a full circle to provide a continuous arc of fire. 
Twin or quad laser barrels jutted from the turret. 
Swivel mounts allowed them to cover the vertical 
field of fire. Safety features built into the targeting 
computer programs didn’t allow the laser to fire 
when any portion of the battle station was within 
its sights (this feature was used to particular 
advantage in the Battle of Yavin; the Alliance’s 
pilots flew courses that wouldn't allow the tow- 
ers to fire without risk of hitting the space sta- 
tion). Turbolasers are most effective against 
lightly-armored and shielded starfighters. Some 
towers were fitted with heavy cannons instead, 
making them useful against capital ships. 

The second section of a typical tower con- 
tained row upon row of capacitor banks. These 


units stored energy that the laser actuator con- 
verted into charged beams of intense light. With- 
out this storage capability, turbolasers would 
not be able to maintain rapid fire for long. 

The third section housed the support crew 
aud maintenance stations, as well as the massive 
turbine generators that powered the tower. 

The final section of the tower contained the 
tracking and targeting computers. and the gun- 
nery crew stations. With the help of specialized 
helmets, gunners provided limited targeting for 
their guns. However, once enemy targets began 
fast-moving attack patterns, only Ше computer 
could keep track of the multiple targets and 
devise fire patterns best able to fend off the 
attack. 

А squad of army troopers guarded each 
turbolaser tower. 


Superlaser Stations 


The Death Star's superlaser was a triumph of 
combat engineering. Eight individual laser sta- 
tions produced beams of super-charged energy 
which converged at a central nexus (called the 
amplification nexus) in front of the massive focus 
lens. There were also four back-up laser stations 


Ж N 


rA 
qt 3 


in case one of the main stations malfunctioned. 
The lens, built around an amplification crystal, 
combined and amplified the eight separate beams 
into a single superlaser beam. This beam was 
regulated in power, providing enough power to 
smash capital ships or provide ground support, 
or enough power to shatter a planet. Itis the main 
weapon around which the rest of the Death Star 
had heen constructed, and all ather systems in 
some way operated to maintain it. 

Two squads of Death Star troopers guard each 
of the superlaser stations. 


Superlaser 


Fire Arc: Forward 

Crew: 168, skeleton 48/+10 

Scale: Death Star 

Skill: Capital ship gunnery: superlaser 
Body: 12D (capital scale) 

Space Range: 1-20/40/100 

Damage: 12D* 


* The Death Star’s power systems can 
generate 2D of damage per hour. The 
Death Star’s superlaser can only fire at 
maximum power. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Seven 


John Paul Lona 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Eight 


АЕ 
ARS" 


ШИШ Chapter Eight 
Security Sector 


68 


Security handled the massive job of protect- 
ing high-ranking officers and visiting officials, 
patrolling and guarding vital or off-limits areas 
aboard tne battle station, maintaining the deten- 
tion cell blocks, and policing the corridors and 
sectors of the Death Star. 

Security officers throughout the Empire are 
called wardens, and they are among the only 
officers to carry a personal weapon at all times. 
Security personnel wear similar uniforms, but 
the detention guard does not regularly wear the 
body armor that security guards patrol in. 

The main purpose behind security remains to 
maintain the peace All communities suffer some 
level of tension and personal violence. A battle 
station is a community comprised of hundreds of 
neighborhoods. The survival of the community 
depends upon its members getting along and 
working together smoothly. At thosetimes when 
an argument or discussion gets out of hand, 
security is there to put down the distiirhance 

Security personnel were also assignedto rank- 
ing officers in order to assure their protection 
and continued well being. Grand Moff Tarkin, for 
example, was constantly surrounded by no less 
than a dozen security agents at all times. Visiting 
officials often brought their own security detail, 
but Death Star security personnel were assigned 
to them as well. 

Security sector personnel were assigned to 
one of several security departments. Personnel 
were seldom transferred, although those assigned 
to extremely sensitive locations were under con- 
stant surveillance and observation. 


Enforcement 


Enforcement included those security guards 
on permanent patrol duty and those held on alert 
to answer calls from anywhere aboard tlie battle 
station. Whenever order must be restored, en- 
forcement was there to do the job. Typical pa- 
trols consisted of two security guards, assigned 
toaspecific sprawl. In times of emergency, secu- 
rity agents were supposed to be ordered to 


sprawls outside their patrol territory, but at no 
time during the short history of this station did 
this occur. 


Protection 


Protection handled the security of officers 
and visiting officials, as well as the protection of 
vital sections of the battle station. Instead of 
patrolling a section of the Death Star, protection 
personnel maintained contact with a single tar- 
get that was made their responsibility. Protec- 
tion could call upon enforcement for backup, but 
its agents were prepared to deal with any situa- 
tion immediately and without direction from su- 
periors. Typical protection squads consisted of 
Six security guards. 


Surveillance 


Surveillance worked with enforcement and 
protectionto createa completeumbrella of secu- 
rity aboard the battle station. Surveillance used 
hidden cameras and sensors positioned through- 
out the Death Star, as well as mobile surveillance 
remotes, to constantly watch over а craft much 
too large to adequately cover with manpower. 
Surveillance stations remained on alert through- 
out all duty shifts. The observers not only relied 
upon sensor warnings, but randomly monitored 
visual images coming in from cameras and 
remotes. If need be, an observer could order a 
surveillance Droid to any section of the station in 
order to perform an on-the-spot investigation. 


Detention 

Detention was the branch of security that main- 
tained the detention blocks and cared for those 
individuals held over for some infraction. Typical 
"guests" crammed into the rows and rows of small 
cells located throughout each detention block in- 
cluded political prisoners, criminals, and even 
Imperial personnel who disobeyed orders. 

Detention wardens and guards were trained in 
the handling of prisoners and the maintenance of 
their cells. They were assisted by monitors at the 


STA 
WA 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Eight 


SECURITY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Security Sector 


Watch 
Stations 


Security 
Offices 


Armory 


Turbolift 
Cluster 


69 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Eight Аб 
АЮ” 


SECURITY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Representative Death Star Security Uniforms 


А 


Interrogator Droids 


ISB Agent 


guard stations which constantly viewed the cells 
with cameras and sensors. The cells themselves 
were virtually escape proof, featuring magnetic 
locks (Very Difficult security rollto disarm), triple- 
thick doors and walls, and only the minimum of 
comforts. 

À typical detention block was protected by a 
warden and 24 detention guards, and was con- 
stantly monitored by sector security through 
numerous auditory and visual monitors. Because 
of the sensitive nature of detention blocks, per- 
sonnel could trigger an alert that zone security 
would act on immediately. Any disruption of the 
monitors in a detention block would also trigger 
an alert in zone security. 


Interrogation 

А special department within security, interro- 
gation handled the debriefing and questioning of 
detainees. It also employed several techniques 
for use with uncooperative prisoners. Interroga- 
tors are trained in psychology and behavioral 
Sciences, as well as the use of pam and drugs to 
get the information they need. They rarely en- 
counter a subject that can defy their probes for 
long. Among the tools available to interrogation 
were a number of specialized Droids such as the 
IT-0 and IT-1 interrogation Droids. The sight of 
these Droids entering a cell was often enough to 
cause a prisoner to reveal everything and any- 
thing he knew about a given subject. 


Imperial Security Bureau 


The ISB serves as a fact-finding and special 
assignments division of the Imperial bureaucracy. 
As such, security was required to provide office 
space and reasonable assistance to the ISB agents 
assigned to the Death Star. Security forces 
throughout the Empire find these agents unde- 
sirable, and their policing and surveillance tech- 
niques are even more harsh than thoseemployed 
by typical security squads. 

The Imperial Security Bureau features special- 
ized agents operating in surveillance, investiga- 
tions, internal affairs, interrogation, re-educa- 
tion and enforcement. but rarely does an agent 
specify what department of the ISB he repre- 
sents. Better to let those concerned guess, since 
this makes them anxious and more likely to re- 
veal convert activity. 

ISB also leashed several undercover agents 
aboard the Death Star. Many slipped into the roles 
of common soldiers, administrative personnel and 
even low-level officers. In this capacity they were 
much closer to the “men in the field” than known 
ISB agents and were better able to investigate 
suspicious activities. It is known that at least one of 
Grand Moff Tarkin's personal aides was an 158 
agent. ISB agents were also known to spy upon 
each other for both personal gain and out of “con- 
cern” for the health of the Empire. 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Ei 


ht 


71 


John Pau! Lona 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Eight a Е Д Фе 
ARS 


SECURITY SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Detention Block 


Maintenance 
, Chutes 


Railing ^ 


Open 


Station 


Detention _ 7 
Cells 


72 


Pob Caswell 


Because of the long-standing rivalry between 
Imperial Intelligence (an official arm of the mili- 
tary) and ISB (a division of COMPNOR, which most 
of the military considers a waste of time and re- 
sources), ISB agents had a particularly difficult 
time performing their duties. While imperial offi- 
cials didn't deliberately obstruct the investiga- 
tions of ISB agents, they did nothing to help these 
agents either. More than one agent who got too 
nosy was reassigned or simply disappeared (it is 
widely believed that Imperial Intelligence's Assas- 
sination Bureau decided to “set a few examples") 


Using Security in the 
Roleplaying Game 

Security remains one of the Imperial service 
branches most familiar to Rebel characters. If 
they aren't trying to break out of a detention 
block, they are eluding security guards set on 
their trail by a hidden alarm or an uncooperative 
official. And what group of Rebel agents hasn't 
beenonthe run from an ISB agent at least once in 
its adventurous career? 


Game statistics for sccurity personncl and 
Droids can be found at the end of this book. The 
maps provided here feature such noteworthy 
locations as a security sector, which can be 
infiltrated for information on anything from pa- 
trol schedules to the travel log of a visiting Impe- 
rial dignitary. À detention cell block can be used 
for rcscuc or сзсарс missions, with thc адаса 
excitement of trying to beat the interrogation 
Droids to the target. 


55545 


м. 
УМА 
Ф Kä, 7 SN NA 


|_ 


í pa” 


L) 


73 


John Paul tona 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine 


74 


AR... 
ARS 


Ell Chapter Nine 
Command Sector 


Command sectors were found throughout the 
battle station. Command sectors included the 
many control rooms from which the Death Star 
was run. Asarule, command sectors were super- 
vised by Imperial officers of по less than lieuten- 
ant rank. 

Many sprawls were dedicated to command, 
and were under a much higher level of security 
than more general sprawls. Such sprawls included 
each zone’s bridge, the numerous auxiliary 
bridges and the overbridge. 

In addition, the Death Star included a throne 
room for the Emperor in its finished design, and 
the maintcnance and management of this cham- 
ber fell to the command sector. The practice of 
setting aside a specific room from which the 
Emperor could rule began when throne rooms 
were built within Star Destroyers of /mperial- 
class or better. While the Emperor rarely, if ever, 
makes use of such facilities, his decree demanded 
that they be available for those rarc occasions. 


Command Structure 


The Imperial command structure aboard the 
Death Star was as strict as any organization 
found in the Empire. The Death Star was under 
the command of a triumvirate headed by a Grand 
Mott, in this case Tarkin. The rest of the com- 
mand trio was made up of General Tagge of the 
Imperial Army, and Admiral Motti of the Imperial 
Navy. Thus, both branches of the armed might of 
the Empire were represented, as well as the 
political branch of the Empire. 

The Chiefs of Navy, Army and Battle Station 
Operations were held by otticers with the rank of 
colonel. Below each Operations Chief were eight 
majors who served as chiefs of specific depart- 
ments under their branch of operations. There 
were also four majors who were responsible for 
the general, service/technical, military and secu- 
rity sectors. 

The rest of the command structure was made 
up of, in rank order, commanders, captains and 


lieutenants. Lesser ranks were not considered 
part of the station’s command sector, instead 
falling into the category of operating forces. 

Two significant portions of the Death Star 
complement did not fall under the normal com- 
mand structure but are worth noting. 

The Emperor's emissary to the Death Star, 
Lord Darth Vader, answered to the Grand Moffas 
a practice of military and political courtesy. He 
was not, however, subject to any other authority 
aboard the battle station. He issued direct and 
unquestioned orders to everyone of the rank of 
colonel and below, and had been known to force 
the admiral and general to bow to his will on 
more than one occasion. 

Stormtroopers did not fall under the jurisdic- 
tion of the army or navy, although both branches 
may call upon their services. Stormtroopers are 
loyal to the Emperor alone, and they have their 
own command structure that remains purposely 
mysterious and out of the normal chain of com- 
mand. It is widely believed that they were di- 
rectly commanded by the Emperor's emissary, 
but that is unconfirmed, and such a command 
structure may have been dependent upon the 
perceived loyalty of the particular emissary. They 
do, however, coordinate their activities with the 
other branches, and they never refused orders 
from the command triumvirate. 


Command Sector Duty Posts 


Acommand sector duty post was any supervi- 
sion station operated by an Imperial lieutenant 
or higher-ranking officer. So, while a weapons 
system station technically fell under the jurisdic- 
tion of the military sector, it featured acommand 
duty post as it was supervised by an Imperial 
officer, usually a captain. A single duty post 
served as a “mini-bridge” from where the com- 
manding officer of a sector or station supervised 
his command and issued orders to his crew. 

Each duty post console contained eight con- 
trol boards. Four boards were devoted to the 


ST 


AR Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine 
"WA 


st Sta Technic companion. Chapter Nine 


COMMAND SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Bridge and Associated Systems 


j Console - 
Viewscreen 7 Viewscreen 


. Access 
Portal 


Viewscreen SCH 


T 


K Hologram 
| Pod 
—- Turbolift 


Viewscreen ^ Viewscreen . Access 


Console ^ Portal 


Duty Post 


Communications | 
: Duty Monitors 


Duty 
Monitors 


Duty 


Command 
Monitors 


Board 


Viewscreen 


Sliding 


/ Doors 


Console d 


Computer 


\ Access 


Duty 
Monitors 


Rob Caswell 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine == Е Й 


particular tasks assigned to the post. The other 
boards handled communications, damage and 
diagnostics, computer access, and a direct feed 
to the post's controlling bridge. 

Atypical command sector duty post featured 
two to four security guards to maintain security, 
but through the console the commanding officer 
could call for additional guards, stormtroopers. 
or even Death Star troopers if the need arose. 


Bridge, Active and Auxiliary 


Each zone of the Death Star had one bridge (a 
total of 24, with 12 in each hemisphere), through 
which all of the sprawls were coordinated, as 
were activities involving other zones. Тће com- 
manding majors and their crews controlled spe- 
cific departments (such as logistics and person- 
nel) as well as the active bridges that handle the 
day-to-day operations of the battle station. In 
practice, they only assumed their command 
chairs during emergencies. At most other times 
they delegated authority to their ranking com- 
manders. Each bridgereported to theoverbridge. 

Eachbridge was guarded by six security guards 
and two stormtroopers. 

In the event that a bridge should be lost due to 
attack, accident, or mechanical difficulty, there 
were scores of auxiliary bridges ready to serve as 
back-up command stations. While not as large as 
an active bridge, an auxiliary bridge neverthe- 
less contained all of the work stations and moni- 
toring capabilities of their on-line counterparts. 
They were not built for work comfort, but for 
utility. 


Overbridge 


The command triumvirate ruled the Death 
Star from the interior command core, or more 
specifically, that portion of the core referred to 
as the overbridge. The overbridge was a massive 
command center that constantly monitored all 
work stations and datafiles on the battle station. 
All information collected by the bridges, sensor 
arrays, communications centers, and even space 
traffic control was routed through the station’s 
central computers and displayed here on the 
banks of monitors and holo displays situated 
throughout the overbridge. 

There were command stations for each mem- 
ber ot the triumvirate, as well as stations for the 
operation chiefs that answered directly to them. 
There were also scores of lesser officers, Droids, 
and enlisted crew working throughout each duty 
shift. 

Theoverbridge could control the entire battle 
station, but it was easier and more efficient to let 
each zone's active bridge handle its share ot the 
work. In emergency situations, the overbridge 


ARS" 


could cut off all lesser command centers and run 
the Death Star. Only the throne room’s command 
center (located one deck directly below ће throne 
room itself) could supersede the overbridge. 

In addition Lo Ше operating officers апа crew, 
12 security officers and guards maintained posts 
within the overbridge to monitor the safety of the 
triumvirate. Another 16 stormtroopers were per- 
manently assigned to the overbridge to insure 
that the Emperor’s will was foremost on the 
minds of both officers and crew. In the unlikely 
еуеш Ша tlie overbridge were to be damaged 
beyond repair, control of the Death Star was to be 
assumed by one of the zone bridges or the throne 
room. 

Adjacent to the overbridge were offices for the 
command triumvirate and their immediate aides. 
Ahuge meeting room was also here, for use when 
the сопипап( ег5 dealt with matters too delicate 
for the ears and eyes of the bridge crew. Finally, 
asecure holo communications booth allowed for 
private transmissions between the Grand Moff or 
Darth Vader and the Emperor. 


Throne Room 


While many believe that the Imperial throne 
room constructed aboard the Death Star was 
merely a figurative gesture to appease the Em- 
peror, it was in fact a fully functional Command 
center. The Emperor could control, monitor, and 
communicate with all areas of the battle station 
from his throne, effectively wielding the ultimate 
weapon as his own will dictates. The throne 
responded only to the Emperor's commands, 
however, using technologies tuned to his par- 
ticular physical and mental patterns. The Ипоне 
could not have been wielded by anyone but the 
Emperor. 

The throne room was built high within an 
exterior tower, providing a spectacular view of 
space beyond. This tower was heavily shielded, 
more so than any other portion of the battle 
station, and the hull around it had been doubly 
reinforced to protect against incoming artillery. 
It was virtually impenetrable from the outside. 

Royal living quarters were below the throne 
room, as well as quarters for the Emperor’s per- 
sonal body guards and his advisors. Within the 
armored sphere, just below the tower, was an 
emergency throne room in casc the tower ever 
suffered structural damage. 

Corridors leading to the throne room and 
royal apartments were loaded with traps and 
security measures to deter any unwanted visi- 
tors. For example, anyone approaching the corri- 
dor leading to the restricted turbolift had to 
punch in an identifying code (Very Difficult secu 


continued on page 81 


76 


STAR Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine 


I enc companion. Chapter ine 


Workstation Key: 


. Grand Moff 's Command Station 
. Admiral's Command Station 

. General's Command Station 

. Battle Station Operations Chíef 
Army Operations Chief 

Navy Operations Chief 

. Duty Post 

. Security Post 

. Stormtrooper Officer Post 


о о мол ою 


Viewscreens 


Main Viewscreen 


Tactical Holo 
Display Pod 


Command Platform 


GM 
22. 


General's 
Office 


Meeting 
Room 


Admiral's — 
Office 


Overbridge 


Navy Operations 
Office 
N 


EN 


© 


Strategic Holo 
Display Pod (2) 


Grand Moff's Office > 


COMMAND SECTOR DIAGRAM 


Army Operations 
Office 


Turbolifts 


4 Viewscreens 


“~~ Duty 


Consoles 


Secure 
Halo Booth 


Battle Station 
Operations 
Office 


Rob Caswell 


AR... 
ARS 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine 


COMMAND SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Death Star Command Recognition Chart 


Admiral General 


Stormuooper Colonel Major, Department Chief Commander 


78 


STA Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine 
WA 


Imperial Advisor* 


Ж 


Lieutenant 


*Usually aboard at Emperor's request 


79 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine „| 5 жш 
ARS 


COMMAND SECTOR DIAGRAM 
Throne Room 


Transparisteel — — 
Viewport Е Throne 


Reinforced a 


Hull ~ 


5liaft) 


Duty Posts ——— "  Viewscreens 


~ 


Console 


^ Viewports 


lurbolitt 


Blast Doors 
to Emergency 


Shuttle Hangar 


—— Hologram 
(open ( У Род 
shaft) 
Consoles 


— — Duty Posts 


Rob Caswell 


| |.  —A——————————— Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine 


rity roll to fake the code) before entering the trap- 
filled passageway. Those who failed to identify 
themselves properly were subjected to a maze of 
laser bolts (five Difficult dodge rolls to reach lift, 
damage 5D for each bolt that hits) and a repulsor 
shield (two Difficult Strength rolls to push 
through). 

If the throne room and royal apartment were 
unoccupied, four squads of stormtroopers guarded 
it in the Emperor's absence. If the Emperor was 
present, the stormtroopers were replaced by four 
squads of tlie Imperial Royal Guard. 


Using the Command Sector in 
the Roleplaying Game 
Many roleplaying game scenarios can be de- 
signed using the Death Star command sector as 
abasis. Thethroneroom, overbridge, bridge and 
duty post maps provide excellent settings that 


can be turned into any command sector aboard 
any Imperial capital ship, space station, plan- 
etary outpost, garrison, or even somewhere 
within an Imperial city. 

The officers, from politically-motivated Grand 
Moffs to power-hungry captains, make excellent 
villains. Use the templates as a basis for your own 
command sector foes, and the troop statistics 
provide additional opponents to hamper and 
threaten characters. 

Typical command sector scenarios include 
breaking onto a bridge to take over a ship or gain 
access to a restricted part of a vessel, being 
brought before an Imperial officer on charges of 
treachery or rebellion. or even pretending to 
serve as a member of the crew in order to gain 
valuable information. You can use duty posts as 
entries into restricted command computers, test- 
ing those Rebels with a flare for computer pro- 
gramming or security. 


81 


Death Star Technical Companion: Chapter Nine ЕН ur | ЖШ 
ARS" 


"ТТТ 77 
Te 


aa Al ДАУР X 


| үү... -»———-— -'—-——!'X''O'Á Death Star Technical Со 
WA 


“Evacuate? In our moment of triumph? 
I think you overestimate their chances!" 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix One AR... 


ШЕШ Appendix One 
Design Flaws 


This appendix was attached to the original 
datafiles for study by Alliance officers, soldiers and 
diplomats. It sums up the lessons learned from the 
encounter with tho first Death Star and the subse 
quent victory over Yavin. 


Through everything we have examined and 
studied, one detail must not be overlooked. No 
matter how powerful or impenetrable the Death 
Star appeared, there were flaws in its design. 
These flaws were exploited at the Battle of Yavin. 
In other words, there are chinks in the dragon's 
armor, waiting for arrows to pierce the tender 
skin between the scales. 


Overconfidence 


Imperial overconfidence remains the 
Rebellion’s biggest advantage in the galactic civil 
war, and nowhere was this overconfidence per- 
sonified better than in the Death Star battle sta- 
tion. Tarkin and his officers believed that its 
sheer size and destructive potential made it in- 
vincible. They believed that no one would dare 
launch a serious attack against it, if such an 
attack could actually pose a threat to the station. 
The Empire, they reasoned, is the ultimate power 
in the galaxy, and the Death Star is its ultimate 
tool of control and fear. 

From their first day in the Academy, Imperial 
officers, pilots, and troopers aretaught that they 
are part of an invincible machine, the best the 
galaxy has to offer. Indoctrination training drives 
home the point: an Imperial soldier is better 
trained, better equipped and better supported 
than the pirates, smugglers and criminal rebels 
endangering the space lanes. It is the Imperial 
soldier's job to use his superior advantages to 
keep order and restore peace to the Empire. 

While this type of training Is well and good, It 
does not teach the Imperials to be cautious or 
respect their foes.It makes them lazy, as they see 
each mission as a routine. humdrum chore that 
must be accomplished before the first meal ofthe 


day. Without a healthy dose of respect, you will 
not expect your foe to do anything out of the 
ordinary or courageous. You will not be watching 
for changes in attitude or tactics, and you will be 
caught off guard when they occur. 

The Death Star was overconfidence personi- 
fied. Officers and crew could not help feeling 
almost godlike in the belly of such a beast. They 
had the power to destroy entire worlds at their 
fingertips! While they gave anodding acceptance 
to capital ships and provided the Death Star with 
defenses against such bothersome craft, they 
practically ignored starfighters. What could gnats 
do to harm a dragon, after all? Yes, gun towers 
were in place to provide token protection, but a 
concerted effort by a wing of starfighters could 
easily breach the half-hearted defense. 

Even when a possible danger was discovered 
once the Alliance attack plan had been analyzed, 
Grand Moff Tarkin chose to ignore the threat. 
Only Darth Vader realized the threat from the 
Rebel attack, and then employed only his hand- 
picked squadron of starfighters. Even he fell 
victim to the overconfidence that pervades the 
Empire and ordered that the gun towers cease 
their defense of the battle station. That supreme 
act of overconfidence stands as a beacon to the 
Alliance, for it exemplifies why we will eventually 
win this war and restore freedom to the galaxy. 


The Force 


“May те Force be with you. ^ 
— Alliance rallying cry 


Asecond weakness in the Imperial machine is 
uie philosophy that teclinulogy is superior to the 
Force. Once the cornerstone of the Republic, the 
Force has been reduced to a fairy tale in the New 
Order. This is strange indeed, since the New 
Order's most powerful representative on the 
Death Star, Darth Vader, is a powerful user of the 
Force's dark side. Rumors have been circulating 
recently that the Emperor himself has privately 
demonstrated such abilities, but still the typical 


84 


A Ries Death Star Technical Companion: А 


"WA 


Imperial has been taught to ignore any evidence 
that the Force is more than a simple religion of a 
less sophisticated era. 

Perhaps the destruction of the Jedi Knights 
helped the Emperor legitimize his efforts to elimi- 
nate believers. Palpatine wants the galactic com- 
munity to believe that if there was any power in 
the Force then the Jedi Knights would have not 
been so easily destroyed. 

The Alliance, onthe other hand, has embraced 
the old religion and made it a rallying cry. To us, 
the Force is both a religion and a beacon of 
freedom and hope. With the emergence of Luke 
Skywalker, who brings to the Alliance new proof 
of the power of the Force, the old religion’s 
number of believers has risen to levels equiva- 
lent to the days when the Jedi were the guardians 
of the galaxy. 

Because the Empire publicly dismisses such 
notions as the Force, it leaves itself open to the 
unexpected. 


Small Craft 


As mentioned earlier, the Death Star was de- 
signed without regard to starfighter-scale appo- 
nents. It was believed that the massive armor and 
sheer size of the battle station would be enough 
to dissuade starfighter attacks. If foes still man- 
aged to work up the nerve to attack, it was 
reasoned that no starfighter packs enough en- 
ergy to do more than raise a welt on the Death 


Star’s thick skin. As an afterthought, anti- 
starfighter turbolaser towers were installed 
across the Death Star’s surface, but these were 
not placed to create an impenetrable screen of 
blaster fire. They were positioned almost ran- 
domly, leaving great holes in any defense they 
could provide. In the Battle of Yavin, the Zone 
Commanders frantically employed the capital 
ship batteries in an attempt to eliminate the 
Rebel starfighters, but these weapons proved 
almost useless against the quick, tiny ships. 

Indeed, the greatest danger to small cratt 
comes from the TIE fighter wings carried within 
the battle station. However, even Imperial pilots 
need time to muster before they can engage 
enemy craft in dogfights, and every Alliance pilot 
knows the advantages X-wings have over TIEs. 

For this reason, starfighters can close on the 
battle station to deliver proton torpedoes or 
blaster fire to any given target. True, astarfighter’s 
arsenal contains nothing that even comes close 
to denting the Death Star, but it daes give the 
Alliance a chance to exploit the next, and fatal, 
flaw in the system. 


Interconnected Subsystems 


Imperial engineers pride themselves on build- 
ing redundant engine and electrical subsystems 
in their capital ships and space stations. If one 
system is knocked out or fails, another immedi- 


endix One 


85 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix One —————ÓÁ——— | ` БИШ 
WARS" 


ately takes its place. If a ship's weapons need 
more power, it can be easily routed from the 
engines or life support, for example. In the Death 
Star this technique was taken а step further. Not 
only are all station subsystems interconnected, 
they are all connected to the main reactor sys- 
tem in order to provide maximum power to all 
subsystems at all times. 

The technical readouts stolen from the Em- 
pire and analyzed by the technicians at the 
Alliancc's basc on Yavin’s fourth moon revealed 
astartling discovery. Small thermal exhaust ports 
scattered over the Death Star's surface opened 
upon shafts leading directly to the main reactor. 
These ports were ray shielded, but proton torpe- 
does would easily cut through the shields. À 
precise hit on the shaft would send а destructive 
shell of energy riding back down through thc 
radioactive exhaust, finally reaching the main 
reactor. The resulting explosion would start a 
chain reaction and destroy the entire battle sta- 
tion as subsystem after subsystem encountered 
energy backlash and exploded in support of the 
main reactor. If not for the interconnections, the 
destruction of thc main rcactor would cripplc 
the Death Star, but not destroy it. 

We saw at the Battle of Yavin how overconfi- 
dence, a lack of believe in the Force, a disregard 
for starfighters and the audacity to ignore attack 
analysis reports combined to destroy the 
Empire's ultimate weapon. 


Future Death Stars 
The debris of the first Death Star has not yet 


cooled over Yavin, and already rumors of a sec- 
ond battle station come from all corners of the 
galaxy. Can the Empire find the resources and 


manpower to launch another Death Star project? 
The answer, unfortunately, is yes. 

If another Death Star appears, we can be sure 
that the designers will have learned from their 
first mistake. They may not be able to deal with 
overconfidence and a lack of faith, but they can 
address such things as anti-starfighter defenses 
and exhaust port shielding. The method and 
tactics used against the first Death Star would 
more than likely prove useless against any suc- 
ссззог. How then is the Alliance to prepare for 
the eventual return of the Death Star? 

The first order of the day is diligence. The 
Alliance must watch for any signs hinting at a 
large-scale construction project anywhere in the 
galaxy. The best defense against the Death Star is 
a strong offense. The only hope is to eliminate a 
new station beforc it is completed. From examin- 
ing the journals, we know that the battle station 
is weakest during its construction phase. Its best 
defense comes in the form of a planet-bound 
shield generator which projects a defensive 
screen around the orbiting construction site. 
Other defenses include conventional space sup- 
port — usually in the form of Star Destroyers. But 
currently the Star Destroyer fleet is occupied 
with hunting down the new main Rebel base and 
rooting out other Alliance staging points. There 
remains precious little firepower to defend such 
a huge undertaking. 

We must locate any and all construction sites 
and hit these battle stations before their own 
weapons and defenses can come on line. Failing 
this, all we can do is wait for weaknesses to 
suggest themselves in the new Death Star mod- 
els. 

Remember, no matter how thick the scales, 
there will always be a chink in the armor. 


86 


STA 
WA 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Two 


Appendix Two 
Death Star Templates 


Grand Moff Tarkin 


Type: Imperial Grand Moff 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 5D, dodge 6D+2, melee combat 4D+2, 
melee parry 5D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Alien species 7D. bureaucracy 9D, cultures 7D. 
intimidation 7D«1, languages 6D+1, planetary 
systems 6D, tactics: fleets 9D, tactics: sieges 10D, 
value 5D 

MECHANICAL 3D+2 

Astrogation 5D, battle station piloting 5D, beast 
riding 5D, capital ship gunnery 4D, capital ship 
piloting 5D. capital ship shields 40 + 1. repulsorlift 
operation 3D+1, space transports 4D+1, starship 
gunnery 4D, starship shields 4D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 6D+2, сопипап у 10D+2, соп 6D+2, garn- 
bling 5D+1, search 5D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 4D+1, stamina 5D, swimming 5D 
TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D, first aid 3D, 
repulsorlift repair 3D, security 5D 

Force Points: 4 

Dark Side Points: 5 

Character Points: 22 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Datapad, blaster pistol (4D), com- 
link, rank code cylinders 


Capsule: Tarkin is a skeletal, gaunt man with 
sharp features and hollow eyes. He proudly wears 
the first Grand Moff rank badge in recognition of 
his work for the Empire. 

Tarkin was a governor in the Outer Rim Terri- 
tories when he proposed a plan for squashing the 
increasingly violent rebellion. His plan was em- 
bodied in the Death Star battle station, a symbol 
for the New Order that inspired fear and pro- 
moted compliance with the Emperor’s will. 

Tarkin can be charming one moment, and 
coldly ruthless the next. He is aman comfortable 
with his role and authority, and he enjoys gener- 
ating fear in those he considers beneath him. 


Admiral Motti 


Type: Imperial Admiral 

DEXTERITY 3D+2 

Blaster 5D, blaster artillery 5D, dodge 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+1 

Bureaucracy 5D+2, planetary systems 5D+1, tac- 
tics: fleets 50+2, tactics: sieges 7D 
MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 5D, capital ship piloting 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 

Bargain 3D+2, command 5D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D, stamina 4D+1 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 4D, security 40-1 
Character Points: 7 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Datapad, blaster pistol (4D), com- 
link, rank code cylinder 


Capsule: Mottiis an expressive man, rather young 
to hold the rank he does. Пе knows that he has 
risen quickly, and it shows in his smug expres- 
sions and somewhat neater and more pressed 
than regulations require dress uniforms. 

Motti is one of the many upstart Imperial 
officers who excels in his devotion to the New 
Order and little else. His career, like the reports 
of his many succcsscs, is overrated. His belief in 
technological strength made him a natural choice 
for the Death Star project, and he was promoted 
over many senior officers so that he could take 
the post as head of Navy Operations on the battle 
station. His disregard for intangibles such as 
spirit and faith is perhaps his greatest flaw. 

Motti is smug and surc in his position and 
activities, and he takes great pains to let every- 
one around him know it. 


General Tagge 
Type: Imperial General 
DEXTERITY 2D 


Blaster 3D: 2, brawling parry 3D, dodge 4D, gre 
nade 4D 


87 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Tvvo ا‎ —— á——— y ay» - — 
mm “WARS” 


88 


KNOWLEDGE 3D+1 

Bureaucracy 4D+1, business 8D, business: Tagge 
Industries 10D+2, military history 7D, survival 
4D+2, tactics: capital ships 7D, tactics: fleets 8D, 
tactics: sieges 7D+2, tactics: starfighters 6D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D+2 

Beast riding 4D+1, repulsorlift operation 5D+1 
PERCFPTION 3D 

Command 4D+2, search 5D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D +2, lifting 4D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, demolition 
5D+1, security 4D 

Character Points: 12 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Datapad, blaster pistol (4D), com- 
link, command rank code cylinder 


Capsule: Tagge is an intense, no-nonsense type 
with a slight paunch. Н does nothing to dispel the 
man’s look of power. 

Tagge moved up through the Imperial chain of 
command despite his steadfast refusal to play 
political games with his competitors. Perhaps it 
was this trait that inspired the Emperor to assign 
Tagge to the Death Star Project. Even if the 
Emperor was behind the general, Tagge’s opin- 
ion that the Senate was a necessary evil for 
controlling the Empire lost him favor in Tarkin’s 
eyes. For this reason, many of his warnings about 
the battle station’s defenses were ignored. 

Taggeis astable and reasonable officer, unlike 
many of his Imperial colleagues. His tactical and 
calculating mind never lets him take action with- 
out careful planning. He can be overly cautious, 
but when he chooses a course of action it is 
usually the right one. 


Bevel Lemelisk 
Type: Imperial Engineer 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Dodge 4D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Languages 5D, planetary systems 5D, value 8D 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
Astrogation 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Bargain 3D+2, command 4D+2, con 4D+2, gam- 
bling 4D 
STRENGTH 2D: 1 
Climbing/jumping 3D+1, lifting 3D+1 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Battle station engineering (A) 13D, battle station 
repair 12D+2, capital ship engineering (A) 12D, 
capital ship repair 8D+2, capital ship weapon 
engineering (A) 13D, capital ship weapon repair 
11D+1, computer programming/repair 8D, droid 
programming 6D+2, droid repair 6D, integrated 
ship systems 10D, repulsorlift repair 7D 


Character Points: 4 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Datapad, comlink, tool kit, portable 
computer 


Capsule: Bevel is a short, white-haired, jolly indi- 
vidual. His eyes reveal a darker, crueler nature 
that he gives free reign to in his work. 

Bevel restrained his darker nature throughout 
his life in the Old Republic. It wasn’t until he was 
selected to work with Walex Blissex to develop 
war ships during the Clone Wars that he was able 
to first vent his violent dreams. These dreams 
took physical shape as Star Destroyers and other 
weapons of war. When the Empire retained his 
services, he was allowed to design whatever his 
warped imagination could conceive. Now that 
the Emperor and Tarkin have placed the chal- 
lenge of an ultimate weapon before him, Bevel 
has never been happier. 

Bevel reveals a different man to the outside 
world. This man is jolly and robust, always quick 
with a smile or a jokc or a compliment. But his 
eyes never smile at these times. They only smile 
when ће 15 hard at work bringing his dark dreams 
to the surface as superlasers and planet buster 
bombs. 


Ars Dangor 
Type: Impcrial Advisor 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 5D, dodge 6D, melee combat 5D«1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 6D, bureaucracy 9D, cultures 7D, 
languages 6D, planetary systems 5D, scholar: 
galactic history 7D, streetwise 6D, survival 5D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D ı1 
Beast riding 4D+1, repulsorlift operation 3D+1 
PERCEPHON 3D 
Bargain 6D, command 8D, con 6D, gambling 6D, 
hide 7D, search 5D, sneak 6D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 
Stamina 5D 
TECHNICAL 2D..2 
Computer programming/repair 40+2, first aid 
5D+2, security 5D+2 
Force Points: 1 
Dark Side Points: 3 
Character Points: 11 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster pistol (damage 
3D+1), vibroblade (damage 40+2) 


Capsule: Агз Dangor is tall and thin beneath his 
black robes. Unlike other Imperial Advisors who 
parade around in almost-clownish costumes, 
Dangor prefers to dress like his master, the Em- 
peror. A fire burns in his widely-spaced eyes, and 
a constant leer plays across his thin lips. 

Ars Dangor has beenanaideto Palpatine since 
the man's days in the Republican Senate. Now he 


—— ГА Po ———————— Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Two 


"WA 


is one of Ше шапу advisors who surround Uu 
Emperor and doteuponhis every movement. But 
Dangor is much more than a court buffoon. He is 
a powerful and dangerous man who sits at the 
Emperor's side. The Emperor, too important and 
wrapped up in thoughts beyond the veil of nor- 
mal humanity, has assigned all public addresses 
and the day-to-day running of the Empire to 
Dangor. The Emperor deals with the big picture: 
he leaves the little pieces for Dangorto take care 
of. 

Ars Dangor is the perfect politician for these 
times of civil unrest and outright war. He is a 
charismatic and powerful speaker, likethe Palpa- 
tine of old who swayed an entire galaxy to fall 
down and worship him. He is also ruthless to an 
extreme degree, and any who fail him do not live 
to do so a second time. Only his admiration for 
the Emperor keeps his own ambitions in check. 
He is content to forever serve — something that 
not even Lord Vader can truly admit to. 


Captain Kornov 
Type: Imperial Captain 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Blaster 4D+1, dodge 4D, melee combat 3D+2, 
melee parry 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Burcaucracy 20 2, planctary systems 5D 
MECHANICAL 3D+2 
Astrogation 4D, space transports 5D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D+1 
Bargain 4D+1, command 50-1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
Brawling 4D, swimming 3D+2 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Security 4D+2, space transports repair 4D+1 
Character Points: 3 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Rank cylinder code key, datapad, 
comlink, blaster pistol (4D) 


Capsule: Captain Kornov is the epitome of an 
Imperial officer: young, strong and darkly hand- 
some. His eyes burn with a desire to serve the 
Empire to the best of his abilities. He demands 
the same of those who serve under his command 
Kornov graduated from the Academy with hon- 
ors and commendations. He served a brief tour of 
duty as a starfighter pilot before he was pulled 
from the line and sent to command school. He 
learned his lessons well. After commanding a 
strike cruiser that was involved in one of the first 
Rehel attacks on an Imperial installation (an at- 
tack that was summarily crushed before it could 
even begin), Kornov found himself assigned to 
Admiral Motti and the Death Star Project. 
Kornov is an idealistic young man who is 
proud of the uniform he wears and truly believes 
that the Rebellion against the Empire is a crimi- 


ual aud shameless act of unwarranted aggres- 
sion. He inspires loyalty and hard work in his 
men, and he reflects the same to his command- 
ers. 


Major Calders, Warden 
Type: Security Warden 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, brawling parry 4D, dodge 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Bureaucracy 3D«1, intimidation 5D, languages 
3D+1, streetwise 4D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
Repulsorlift operation 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Bargain 4D+2, command 40+2, hide 3D+2, search 
4D+2, sneak 3D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 40-1, climbing/jumping 3D+2, stamina 
4D 
TECHNICAL 2D+1 
Computer programming/rcpair 3D- 1, demolitions 
3D+1, security 40-1 
Character Points: 2 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Comlink, blaster pistol (4D), stun 
truncheon (40+ 1 stun damage), interrogator kit 
on belt 


Capsule: Major Calders is a thick-muscled bull ot 
a man who appears to be busting out of his 
uniform. His mustache contains a hint of gray. 
Calders began his career as a security guard at 
the political detention wards of Odik II. This 
highly-secret facility housed many of the dissi- 
dents from the Old Republic who refused to 
accept the Emperor's New Order. His work was 
so exemplary that Calders quickly moved up 
through the ranks. It wasn't long before he was 
the warden for the entire facility. 

Because of his work at the secret detention 
wards, Calders was a natural for assignment to 
the prison planet where the Death Star was being 
constructed. He was given the prestigious duty 
of overseeing the prisoner labor pool and forging 
them into a tireless machine. He exceeded even 
hisown high expectations and drankin the praise 
of Grand Moff Tarkin and General Tagge willingly. 
Now he controls a wing of detention blocks on 
the completed battle station. His men aretrained 
and understand the way he likes to run things. АП 
he needs now is the first contingent of prisoners 
to fill the currently-empty cells. 

Calders is restrained aggression in Human 
form. His physical strength has become his per- 
sonality. Heis politeto his "guests" for as long as 
his orders demand such treatment, but he can 
barely hide his glee when orders come through 
for interrogation — or worse. 


89 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Two —  ———Óá——— У. IR. 
——— 22-27 ———— zxWARS 


Dezix of ISB 


Type: Imperial Security Bureau Agent 
DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 6D, blaster artillery 4D, brawling parry 
4D, dodge 5D, grenade 3D+2, melee combat 5D, 
melee parry 4D+1, vehicle blasters 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D:2, bureaucracy 5D, cultures 
3D+2, intimidation 6р +2, languages 4D, planetary 
systems 4D, streetwise 5D, survival 4D 
MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 3D+1, beast riding 4D, repulsorlift 
operation 4D+2, space transports 4D, starship 
gunnery 3D+2, starship shields 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 5D+1, command 5D+2, con 4D+2, gam- 
bling 3D+2, hide 5D+1, search 4D, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D+1, climbing/jumping 4D+1, stamina 
4D+2, swimming 3D+1 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 3D+2, demolition 
4D, security 6D 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Vibroblade (STR+1D+2), blaster pis- 
tol (4D), hold-out blaster (3D+1), thermal detona- 
tor (10D), glowrod, security tool kit, medpac, 
datapad, comlink, pocket computer, syntherope 


Capsule: Dezix can be so inconspicuous that 
those who have known him all his life would be 
hard pressed to give an adequate description of 
the man. When he wants to be noticed, however, 
Dezix can fix you with such a strong, cold, evil 
gaze that you will never forget him. 

Dezix 15 a typical ISB agent ruthless and cun- 
ning to a fault. An ISB agent’s very presence 
inspires paranoia, and Dezix has honed his skills 
at producing even more than the normal level of 
anxiety. He has been trained to become a shadow 
on the trail of traitors and enemies to the New 
Order. When the time is right, he can strike with 
the quickness of a jeco and the fierceness of a 
rancor. His has the authority to deal out justice 
as he sees fit, even without the formality of trial 
or hearing. 

The ISB maintains standing offices in all secu- 
rity sectors, and Dezix was chosento head up the 
corps of agents assigned to the Death Star. Their 
mission, as always, is to walch for activities 
detrimental to the proper running of the battle 
station, and be on the look out for threats to the 
New Order. Imperial security is Dezix's sacred 
trust, and he will never betray that trust. 

Dezix is a man of extremes. He is either so 
inconspicuous that he is never noticed, or so 
terrifying та heis regarded as a predator oii the 
hunt. He is a man of many faces, exchanging 
moods and masks in the performance of his 


duties. 


Ensign Hocce, Med Tech 
Type: Medical Technician 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Dodge 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 
Alien species 40+2. cultures 3D+2, languages 4D. 
survival 3D+1, value 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 
Repulsorlift operation 3D+2, space transports 
3D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D+2 
Bargain 4D+2, command 4D, gambling 4D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
Lifting 3D+2, stamina 4D+2, swimming 4D 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Computer programming/repair 4D+1, droid re- 
pair 4D+1, first aid SD, medicine (A) 4D+2 
Character Points: 3 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Medical kit, medpac, medical droid 
restraining bolt controller 


Capsule: Hocce looks older than his years, and 
his shoulders bend as though he carries the 
weight of the Death Star itself on his rounded 
back. 

Ensign Hocce has had a tough time of it in 
Imperial service. He always had a desire to help 
people, and when he showed a natural talent for 
medicine, he knew he had found his career. His 
world, however, is one of the Galactic Core worlds, 
and he was required to serve time in the Imperial 
military. Appalled at some of the more cruel 
missions he has had to witness, Hocce neverthe- 
less excelled as a medical technician. He knows 
that he will never achieve a prominent rank, but 
he also knows Imperial Command will never let 
him leave the service. Doctors with his level of 
skill and dedication are just too hard to come by. 

Now he serves aboard the Death Star battle 
station, and his despair threatens to consume 
him. The Death Star represents all he has cometo 
despise in the Empire and the New Order, and yet 
he is forced to keep it in working order by treat- 
ing its crew. He will never go against his sacred 
vow of healing, but he sometimes dreams of 
finding a planet far from the growing conflict 
where he can ply his vocation in peace. 

Hocceis quiet and gentle, quick with a friendly 
word when treating patients. However, his eyes 
are filled with pain as he struggles with his con- 
science over the situation he has been forced 
into. 


Death Star Crew Statistics 


* Imperial Colonel. Dexterity 2D, blaster 3D, me- 
lee combat 3D, Knowledge 4D, bureaucracy 5D, 


90 


п TAR Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Tvvo 
WARS 


languages 5D, Mechanical 3D, astrogation 4D, 
space transports 4D, Perception 4D, bargain 4D- 1, 
command 5р, con 4D+1, Strength 2D, stamina 3D, 
Technical 3D, computer programming/repair 3D- 1, 
security 4D. Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, 
typically 0-5. Rank cylinder code key, datapad, 
comlink, blaster pistol (4D). 


* Imperial Major. Dexterity 2D, blaster 3D+1, me- 
lee combat 3D«1, Knowledge 4D, alien species 
40+1, bureaucracy 40+1, planetary systems 5D, 
Mechanical 3D, astrogation 4D+ 1, space transports 
3D+2, starship shields 4D, Perception 4D, bargain 
4D+1, command 4D+1, Strength 2D, brawling 3D, 
stamina ЗР, Technical 3D, computer program- 
ming/repair 30+1, space transports repair 3D+2, 
security 4D. Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, 
typically 0-5. Rank cylinder code key, datapad, 
comlink, blaster pistol (4D). 


* Imperial Captain. Dexterity 2D+2, blaster 4D+2, 
dodge 3D+2, grenade 3N+2, Knamledge 3D, bır 
reaucracy 4D, Mechanical 3D+2, astrogation 4D+ I, 
space transports АР, Perception 3D+1, command 
5D+ 1, Strength 2D- 1, brawling 3D+ 1, Technical 3D, 
security 4D. Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, 
typically 0-5. Rank cylinder code key, datapad, 
comlink, blaster pistol (4D). 


* Imperial Lieutenant. Dexterity 2D+2, blaster 
4D+2, dodge 4D, Knowledge 3D, bureaucracy 4D, 
planetary systems 3D+1, Mechanical 3D+2, space 
transports 4D, Perception 30+1, bargain 5D+1, 
command 4D«1, sneak 4D, Strength 2D+1, brawl- 
ing 3D+2, stamina 3D+1, Technical 3D, space trans- 
ports repair 4D«1. Move: 10. Character Points: 
Varies, typically 0-5. Rank cylinder code key, 
comlink, blaster pistol (4D). 


* Shield Operation Crew. Dexterity 2D, blaster 
3D, Knowledge 2D, Mechanical 2D, capital ship 
shields 4D, repulsorlift operation 3D, Perception 
2D. con 3D. Strength 2D. climbing/lifting 3D. Tech- 
nical 2D, computer programming/repair 3D. Move: 
10. Character Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Com- 
puter tool kit, data pad, comlink, chronometer, 
blaster pistol (4D). 


* Sensor Operation Crew. Dexterity 2D, melee 
combat 3D, melee parry 3D, Knowledge 2D. alien 
species 3D, Mechanical 2D, sensors 4D, Perception 
2D, search 4D, Strength 2D, lifting 3D, Technical 
2D, computer programming/repair 3D, security 
3D. Move. 10. Character Points: Varies, Lypically 
0-5. Computer tool kit, datapad, comlink, mac- 
robinoculars, force pike (STR«2D). 


* Stormtrooper Colonel. Dexterity 3D, blaster 
5D, brawling parry 5D, dodge 5D, Knowledge 3D, 


survival 4D, Mechanical 3D, repulsorlift operation 
4D, Perception 3D, command 5D, search 4D, Strength 
3D, brawling 4D, Technical 3D, security 4D. Move: 
10. Character Points: Varies, typically 0-5. 
Stormtrooper armor* («1D energy, «2D physical, - 
1D Dexterity and related skills), blaster rifle (5D). 
* For complete information on stormtrooper ar- 
mor, see page 157 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition. 


* Stormtrooper Squad Leader. АП stats are 2D 
except:Dexterity 3D, blaster 4D, brawling parry 
4D, dodge 4D, grenade 4D+2, command 3D, brawl- 
ing 3D. Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, typi- 
cally 0-5. Stormtrooper armor* (+10 energy, +20 
physical, -1D Dexterity and related skills), blaster 
pistol (4D). 

* For complete information on stormtrooper ar- 
mor, see page 15/ ot Star Wars: 1һе Koleplaying 
Game, Second Edition. 


e Stormtrooper. Allstate are2Dexcept: Dexterity 
3D, blaster4D, grenade 4D«2. Move: 10. Character 
Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Stormtrooper ar- 
mor* («1D energy, «2D physical, -1D Dexterity 
and related skills), blaster rifle (5D). 

* For complete information on stormtrooper ar- 
mor, see page 157 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition 


* Imperial Royal Guard. Dexterity 5D, blaster 7D, 
blaster artillery 6D, brawling parry 6D, dodge 7D, 
melee combat ӨР, melee combat force pike 8D+2, 
melee parry 5D, Knowledge 2D+ 1, streetwise 3D+ 1, 
survival 6D, Mechanical 2D+2, Perception 2D+2, 
bargain 30+2, command 50+2, hide 6D«2, search 
6D+2, sneak 6D+2, Strength 3D, brawling 6D, climb- 
ing/jumping 6D, lifting 5D, stamina 6D, Technical 
2D+1, demolition 5D+ 1, first aid 3D, security 40+1. 
Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, typically 1-5. 
Heavy blaster pistol (5D), armor (+2D physical, 
+1D energy, -1D Dexterity), force pike (STR+3D). 


e Bridge Pit Crew. Dexterity 2D, blaster 2D+1, 
dodge 3D, Knowledge 2D, alien species 3D, bureau- 
cracy 3D, languages 3D, planetary systems 3D, 
value 5D, Mechanical 2D, astrogation 5D, battle 
station piloting: Death Star 5D, capital ship gun- 
nery 3D, capital ship shields 3D, Perception 2D, 
Strength 2D. stamina 3D. Technical 2D. capital 
ship repair 3D, computer programming/repair 3D, 
security 3D. Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, 
typically0-3. Comlink, chronometer, pocket com- 
puter. 


e Army Field Officer. Dexterity 2D, blaster 5D+2, 
dodge 40+1. grenade 4D«2. vehicle blasters 5D. 
Knowledge 30+1, bureaucracy 5D, survival 4D- 2, 
Mechanical 3D, walker operation: AT-AT 5D, Per- 


91 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Two TAR 
WARS” 


ception 3D, bargain 40+ 1, command 4D+2, search 
4D, Strength 3D, brawling 5D, stamina 4D, Techni- 
cal 3D, demolition 40, walker repair: АТАТ 4D« 1. 
Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, typically 0-5. 
Field armor and helmet («1D physical, +2 en- 
ergy), heavy blaster pistol (5D), grenades (5D), 
helmet comlink, utility belt with supplies, sur- 
vival gear pack 


е Army Trooper. Dexterity 3D, blaster 4D+ 1, dodge 
4D- 1, grenade 30+2, vehicle blasters 3D+2, Knowl- 
edge 10+1, survival ZD«I, Mechanical 1D- f, 
repulsorlift operation 2D- I, Perception 2D, Strength 
30+1, brawling 4D«1, Technical 1D. Move: 10. 
Character Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Field ar- 
mor and helmet (+1D physical, +2 energy), blaster 
rifle (5D), grenades (5D), helmet comlink, utility 
belt with supplies, survival gear pack. 


* Army Assault Crew. Dexterity 2D+2, blaster 
4D-2, blaster artillery 3D+2, vehicle blasters 5D+2, 
Knowledge IN, survival 2D, Mechanical 3D+2. 
ground vehicle operation 5D+2, Perception 20+1, 
search 3D+1, Strength 2D, brawling 5D, Technical 
2D, ground vehicle repair 2D+ I. Move: 10. Charac- 
ter Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Shock suit and 
helmet (+10 physical, +1 energy), blaster pistol 
(4D+2), helmet comlink, utility belt with sup- 
plies. survival gear pack. 


* Death Star Trooper Squad Leader. Dexterity 
3D+ 1, blaster4D, blaster: blaster pistol 5D« 1, dodge 
40-1, grenade 4D« 1, Knowledge 2D+1, streetwise 
3D« 1, Mechanical 2D+2, Perception 4D, command 
6D, search 4D+2, Strength 3D«2, brawling 5D+2, 
Technical 2D. demolition 3D. Move: 10. Character 
Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Blaster pistol (4D), 
blaster rifle (5D), grenades (5D), helmet comlink, 
utility belt with supplies, blast helmet (+1D physi- 
cal, +1 energy). 


¢ Death Star Trooper. Dexterity 3D+ 1, blaster 4D, 
blaster: blaster pistol 5D+1, blaster artillery 4D+2, 
dodge 4D+1, grenade 4D+1, vehicle blasters 4D+2, 
Knowledge 2D+1, streetwise 3D+1, Mechanical 
2D+2, Perception 4D, command 5D, search 5D+2, 
Strength 3D«2, brawling 20+2, Technical 2D. Move: 
10. Blaster pistol (4D), blaster rifle (5D), gre- 
nades (5D), comlink, blast helmet (+1D physical, 
+1 energy). 


¢ Death Star Trooper (Command Sector). Dex- 
terity 3D- 1, blaster 5D, blaster: blaster pistol 7D+ 1, 
blaster artillery 4D«2, dodge 6D+1, grenade 4D+ 1, 
vehicle blasters 4D+2, Knowledge 2D- 1, streetwise 
3D-1, Mechanical 2D+2, Perception 4D, command 
5D, search 5D«2, Strength 3D+2, brawling 5D«2, 
Technical 2D, demolition 3D. Move: 10. Blaster 
pistol (4D), blaster rifle (5D), grenades (5D), 


comlink, hlast helmet (+1D physical, +1 energy). 


e Death Star Gunner. Dexterity 2D» 2, blaster 3D+2, 
blaster artillery 4D+2, vehicle blasters 4D+2, Knowl- 
edge 1D+1, Mechanical 3D, capital ship gunnery 
5D, capital ship shields 4D, Perception 10+1, 
Strength 1D+1, Technical 2D, capital starship 
meapon repair 4D. Targeting computer linkup 
helmet (+2D fire control capital scale weapons 
only), blaster pistol (4D), protective armor (+1D 
physical, +2 energy), tool kit. 


e TIE Fighter Pilot. Dexterity 3D+1, blaster 4D+1, 
dodge 4D+1, Knowledge 2D, planetary systems 3D, 
Mechanical 4D. sensors 4D+2. starfighter piloting 
6D, starship gunnery 5D, Perception 3D, command 
4D, search 4D, Strength 3D, stamina 4D, Technical 
2D, computer programming/repair 3D+ I, starfighter 
repair 50. Move: 10. Navigation Computer кир 
helmet (internal comlink, +1D to sensors), high 
gravity stress flight suit with life support equip- 
ment. one week emergency rations, blaster pistol 
(4D), survival gear. 


e Detention Guard. Dexterity 2D, blaster 5D, brawl- 
ing рату 2D+2, melee сотрас 3D, melee рату 
2D+2, Knowledge 2D, alien species 3D, streetwise 
3D, Mechanical 2D, Perception 2D, bargain 3D, con 
3D. command 2D+2, search 3D, Strength 2D, brawl- 
ing 3D, Technical 2D, security 3D. Move: 10. Char- 
acter Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Blaster rifle 
(damage 5D), force pike (STR+2D), comlink, code 
key cylinder, 


е Security Guard. Dexterity 2D, blaster 4D, brawl- 
ing parry 4D, dodge 3D, melee combat 3D+2, melee 
parry 4D, Knowledge 2D, alien species 3D, bureau- 
cracy 3D, streetwise 3D, Mechanical 2D, Percep- 
tion 2D, bargain 3D+2, command 3D+2, con 3D+1, 
sneak 3D, search 3D«1, Strength 2D, brawling 
3D+2, Technical 2D, security 3D. Move: 10. Char- 
acter Points: Varies, typically 0-5. Body armor 
(«1D energy, «2D physical), blaster rifle (5D), 
force pike (STR+2D), comlink, code key cylinder. 


* Medical Technician. Dexterity 2D+2, dodge 
4D+2, Knowledge ІР, alien species 4D, cultures 3D, 
languages 3D, survival 30+1, value 3D+2, Me- 
chanical 1D, repulsorlift operation 3D+1, space 
transports 2D«1, Perception 2D«1, bargain 4D, 
command 3D, gambling 4D, Strength 2D, lifting 
2D+2, stamina 3D, Technical 3D, first aid 5D, 
medicine (А) 2D«2. Move: 10. Character Points: 
Varies, typically 0-5. Stun trunchceon (3D stun 
damage), medical kit, medpac, comlink. 


* Service Technician. Dexterity 2D, dodge 3D, 
melee combat 2D+2, melee рату 2D«2, Knowl- 
edge 2D, value 4D, Mechanical 2D, Perception 2D, 


92 


STAR.  Á— — ЕЎ ЎЎ Dieatb Star Technical Companion: Appendix Two 
WARS 


gambling 3D, search 3D, Strength 2D, climbing/ 
jumping 3D, lifting 2D+2, Technical 2D, battle 
station repair 7D«2, computer programming/re- 
pair 4D, droid programming 4D, droid repair 5D, 
space transports repair 4D, systems diagnosis 8D. 
Move: 10. Character Points: Varies, typically 0-3. 
Stun truncheon (3D stun), tool kit, comlink. 


* Engineer. Dexterity 3D, blaster 4D, dodge 4D, 
Knowledge 5D, value 5D, Mechanical 3D, capital 
ship shields 3D+2, Perception 3D, con 3D+2, gam- 
bling 3D: 1, search АР, Strength ЗР, brawling 3D 2, 
Technical 3D, battle station engineering (А) 2D, 
battle station repair 9D+ I, capital ship engineering 
(A) 4D+2, capital ship repair 5D, computer pro- 
gramming/repair 5D, droid programming 5D, droid 
repair 6D+2, systems diagnosis 7D+1. Move: 10. 
Character Points: Varies, typically 0-3. Blaster 
pistol (AD), tool kit, comlink, protective suit. 


* Maintenance Droid. Dexterity 2D, Knowledge 
10, value 40, Mechanical 2D, Perception 2D, search 
3D, Strength 3D, Technical 2D, battle station repair 
5D, capital ship repair 3D, systems diagnosis 5D. 
Move: 7. Heavy grasper (+2D to lifting), fine ma- 
nipulator, laser cutter (4D), diagnostic 
scanners(«IDtoallrepair skills), retractable tool 
appendages. 


* System Operator Droid. Dexterity 1D, Knowl- 
edge 2D, planetary systems 5D, value 5D, Mechani- 
cal 2D, astrogation 5D, battle station piloting 5D, 
capital ship piloting АП, space transports 5D, Per- 
ception 3D, Strength 1D, Technical 2D, computer 
programming/repair 3D. Move: 3. Fine manipula- 
tors, starship interface jacks, retractable tool 
appendages. 


* Labor Droid. Dexterity 2D, Knowledge 1D, Me- 
chanical ID. Perception 1D. Strength 8D. lifting 
10D, Technical 1D. Move: 7. Heavy graspers (+20 
to lifting), magnetic digits, visual spectrum scan- 
ners. 


* Servant Droid. Dexterity 2D, Knowledge 2D, 
bureaucracy 3D, cultures 4D, languages 3D, scholar: 
culinary arts 5D, scholar: home economics 4D, 
Mechanical 1D, repulsorlift operation 2D, Percep- 
tion 2D, Strength 2D, Technical ID. Move: 9. Visual 
spectrum scanners, vocabulator speech/sound 
system, humanoid appendage configuration. 


* Surveillance Remote Droid. Dexterity 2D, 
blaster 2D« 1, dodge 4D, Knowledge 1D, Mechani- 
cal ID, Perception 2D, search 6D, sneak 4D, Strength 
10+1, Technical 2D. Move: 9. Repulsorlift engine, 
visual range holocam with simultaneous trans- 
mitter, holo recciver unit, spotlight, light blaster 


(damage 2D). 


* IT-O Interrogation Droid. Dexterity 1D. dodge 
3D, melee combat 3D, melee parry 3D, interroga- 
tion devices 4D+1, Knowledge 3D, intimidation: 
interrogation 4D+ 1, Mechanical 2D, Perception 4D, 
search ӘР, Strength 3D, Technical 2D, first aid 4D, 
security 4D. Move: 3. Laser scalpel (3D), hypoder- 
mic injectors (4D stun damage), power shears 
(5D damage), grasping claw («1D to lifting). 


e Probe Droid. Dexterity 3D, blaster 4D, Knowl- 
edge 2D+2, planetary systems 4D, Mechanical 3D, 
sensors OD, Perception JD, search 4D, search: 
tracking 7D+1, Strength АР, Technical 2D+ 1. Move: 
14. Long-range sensor (+10 to search for objects 
between 200 meters and five kilometers away), 
movement sensor («2D to search for moving ob- 
jects up to 100 meters away), atmosphere sensor 
—can determine atmosphere class (Typel, Type 
Il, Type Ill, or Type IV) within onc half-hour, 
blaster cannon (4D+2), self-destruct mechanism, 
repulsor generator for movement Over any ter- 
rain, several retractable manipulator arms, sev- 
eral retractable sensor arms for gathering 
samples. 


• MSE General Purpose Droid. Dexterity 2D, 
Knowledge 10, Mechanical ID, Perception 10), 
Strength 1D, Technical 1D. Move: 5. Electro-pho- 
toreceptor, auditory sensor, holocam, treads, 
retractable heavy manipulator («2D to /ifting), 
retractable fine manipulator (+1D to lifting), plus 
programmed skill matrix*. 

* For more information, see page 102 of the Dark 
Force Rising Sourcebook. 


* Medical Droid. Dexterity 2D, Knowledge 2D, 
alien species 4D, Mechanical 2D, Perception 2D, 
Strength 2D, lifting 3D, Technical 5D, first aid 6D, 
medicine (А) 8D. Move: 7. Medical diagnostic 
computer, analytical computer, various surgical 
attachments, internal store of medicine and hy- 
podermic delivery system. 


* Dianoga. Dexterity 2D, Perception 3D+ 1, Strength 
6D. Special abilities: Can change color to match 
surroundings (+4D to sneak); tentacles (target 
must make opposed Strength roll to escape and 
not be dragged along). Move: 3. 


Carried Craft Statistics 


* Assault Shuttle. Capital, capital ship gunnery 
3D+2, capital ship piloting 5D. Maneuverability 
2D, space 8, hull 3D+2, shields 4D+2. Weapons: 4 
laser cannons (fire control 3D, damage 2D), trac- 
tor beam projector (fire control 4D, damage 5D+2), 
concussion missiles (fire control 2D+1, damage 
4D). 


93 


Death Star Technical Companion: Appendix Two n Ү ү. ү. жиш 
————M— ÁÓÓMM—HÉÉÁÓÓÁ———Mrre7Á» WARS 


94 


* Skipray Blastboat. Capital, capital ship gun- 
nery 5D, starfighter piloting 4D, starship gunnery 
5D-« 1, starship shields 4D+ 1. Maneuverability 1D+2 
(2D+2 in atmosphere), space 8, atmosphere 415, 
hull 2D+1, shields 2D. Weapons: 3 medium ion 
cannons (fire-linked, fire control 3D, damage 4D), 
proton torpedo launcher (fire control 2D, dam- 
age 9D), 2 laser cannons (fire-linked, fire contro] 
1D, damage 5D), concussion missiles (fire con- 
trol 1D, damage 6D). 


* Strike Cruiser. Capital, capital ship gunnery 
4D+2, capital ship piloting 5D, capital ship shields 
30+2. Maneuverability 2D, space 6, hull 6D, shields 
2D+2. Weapons: 20 turbolasers (fire control 2D, 
damage 5D), 10 turbolaser batteries (fire control 
1D, damage 7D), 10 tractor beam projectors (fire 
control 2D, damage 4D), 10 ion cannon (fire con- 
trol 4D, damage 4D). 


е DropShip. Starfighter, space transports 4D, star- 
ship gunnery 3D+ 1, starship shields 3D. Maneuver- 
ability 0, space 10 (during drop); 2 (on return 
flight), atmosphere 415 (during drop); 225 (on 
return flight), hull 4D, shields ID. Weapons: 1 
light laser cannon (fire control 1D, damage 1D). 


* Cargo Barge. Capital, capital ship gunnery 3D, 
capital ship piloting 3D. Maneuverability OD, space 
2, atmosphere 225, hull 2D. Weapons: 2 twin laser 
cannons (fire control 1D, damage 2D). 


е TIE Fighter. Starfighter, starfighter piloting 6D, 
starship gunnery 5D. Maneuverability 2D, space 
10, atmosphere 415, hull 2D. Weapons: 2 laser 
cannons (fire-linked, fire control 2D, damage 5D). 


¢ TIE Bomber. Starfighter, starfighter piloting 
4D+2, starship gunnery 6D+ 1. Maneuverability OD, 
space 6, atmosphere 330, hull 4D: 1. Weapons: 2 
laser cannons (fire-linked, fire control 2D, dam- 
age 3D), concussion missiles (fire control 3D, 
damage 9D). 


e TIE Interceptor (Prototype). Starfighter, star- 
fighter piloting 5D, starship gunnery 4D+2. Maneu- 
verability 3D, space 11, atmosphere 435, hull 
2D+2. Weapons: 4 laser cannons (fire-linked, fire 
control 2D+2, damage 6D). 


* AT-AT Walker. Walker, maneuverability 0D, 
move 21; 60 KMH, body strength 6D. Weapons: 
two heavy laser cannons (fire-linked, fire control 
2D, 50-500/1.5KM/3KM, damage 6D), two medium 
blasters (fire-linked, fire control 2D, 50-200/500/ 
1KM, damage 3D). 


* AT-ST Walker. Walker, maneuverability 1D, 
move 30; 90 KMH, body strength 3D. Weapons: 
twin blaster cannon (fire control 1D, 50-200/1KM/ 
2KM, damage 4D), twin light blaster cannon (fire 
control 1D, 50-300/500/1KM, damage 2D), con 
cussion grenade launcher (fire control 1D, 10-50/ 
100/200, damage 3D). 


* Mobile Command Base. Speeder, maneuver- 
ability 0D, move 35; 100KMH, body strength 7D. 
Weapons: heavy laser cannon (fire control 2D, 
50-500/1KM/2KM, damage 4D 2). 


* Juggernaut. Walker, maneuverability 0D, томе 
70; 200KMH; slow to 8; 25 KMH when turning, 
body strength 5D. Weapons: 3 heavy laser can- 
non (fire control 2D, 50-500/1KM/2KM, damage 
6D), medium blaster cannon (fire control 1D, 50- 
250/750/1.5KM, damage 4D), 2 concussion gre- 
nade launchers (fire control 1D, 50-100/250/500, 
damage 30+ 1). 


• Repulsorlift Sled. Speeder, maneuverability 
1D+2, move 280; 800KMH, body strength 1D+2. 
Weapons: medium blaster cannon (fire control 
2D, 50-100/250/500, damage 3D). 


• Floating Fortress. Walker, maneuverability OD, 
move 70; 200KMH, body strength 5D. Weapons: 2 
heavy blaster cannons (fire control 21), о0-о00/ 
1KM/2KM, damage 5D). 


е Repulsortank. Speeder, maneuverability 1D+2, 
move 140; 400KMH, body strength 4D+2. Weap- 
ons: heavy laser cannon (fire control 2D+2, 200- 
1KM/3KM/5KM, damage 6D), medium blaster 
cannon (fire control LD«1, 50-200/500/1KM, dam- 
age 3D+2). 


== AR [Death Star Technical Companion: endix Two 
WARS _____-______ UL comen Appendix Two 


ogy 5D; MEC 2D, astrogation 5D, starship piloting 
5D; PER 3D; STR 1D; TEC 2D, computer program- 
ming 3D. 

Equipment: fine manipulators, starship inter- 
face jacks, retractable tool appendages. 


* Labor Droid: DEX 2D, speed code 2D; KNO 1D; 
MEC 1D; PER 1D; STR 8D, lifting 10D; TEC 1D. 

Equipment: heavy graspers, magnetic digits, 
visual spectrum scanners. 


* Servant Droid: DEX 2D, speed code 2D; KNO 2D, 
bureaucracy 3D, cultures 4D, languages 3D, culi- 
nary arts 5D, home economics 4D; MEC 10, 
repulsorlift operation 2D; PER 2D; STR 2D; TEC 1D. 

Equipment: visual spectrum scanners, 
vocabulator speech/sound system, humanoid ap- 
pendage configuration. 


* Surveillance Remote Droid: DEX 2D, speed code 
4D, blaster 2D«1, dodge 4D; KNO 1D; MEC 1D; PER 
2D, hide/sneak 4D, search 6D; STR 1D+1; TEC 2D. 
Equipment: repulsorlift engine, visual range 
holocam with simultaneous transmitter, holo re- 
ceiver unit, spotlight, light blaster (damage 2D). 


* [nterrogator Droid: DEX 10, speed code ID, 
dodge 3D, melee 3D, interrogation devices 4D- 1; 
KNO 3D, alien races 4D, humanoid biology 5D, 
interrogation techniques 4D«1; МЕС 2D; PER 4D, 
search 5D; STR 3D; TEC 2D, medicine 4D, security 
4D. 


Equipment: repulsorlift engine, laser scalpel 
(damage 2D), power shears (damage 4D+2), hypo- 
dermic injectors (stun damage 3D). 


* Probe Droid: DEX 3D, speed code 4D, blaster 4D, 
dodge 4D; KNO 2D+2, planetary systems 4D; MEC 
3D; PER3D, hide/sneak 4D, search 4D; STR 4D; TEC 
20+1. 

Equipment: multi-purpose appendages, inves- 
tigation and analysis computer, sensor array, wide- 
range sensors and recording devices, blaster (dam- 
age 40+2). 


* MSE General Purpose Droid: DEX 2D, speed 
code 4D; KNO 1D, technology 2D; MEC 1D; PER 2D, 
search 4D; STR 1D; TEC ID, security 3D. 
Equipment: electro-photoreceptor, auditory 
sensor, holocam, retractable heavy manipulator 
(STR+2D), retractable fine manipulator (STR+1D). 


* Medical Droid: DEX 2D, speed code 2D; KNO 2D, 
alien races 4D; MEC 2D; PER 2D; STR 2D, lifting 3D; 
ТЕС 3D, medicine 6D. 

Equipment: medical diagnostic computer, ana- 
lytical computer, various surgical attachments, 
internal store of medicine and hypodermic deliv- 
ery system. 


• Dianoga: DEX 2D, speed code 4D, PER 3D+1, 
STR 6D 


95 


by Bill Slaviesek 


| 


Н із a period of gaactic civil war. On one she, а rag- 
tog collection of freedom fighters called the Rebel 
Alliance. On the other, the terrible might of the 
Empire, best svimbolkzes! by the techmological terror 
known ас the (eat Star. 

Am armored!) hope dation Ube size of small rue, 


the Death Star packed enough firepa.wer to destroy 
planets. Alliance researchers have uncovered many of 
Біле p s въ lo пије фи eee ah eee eg em ge an gallon. іла 
history, and gathered the information bogeliecr im thes 
one volume. The Drath Stor һан ест destroyed, hat 
its begacy lives enn. 


a DIL. TC ME ie Eee 
[UT INN IERI E cpl ee PI 


