» TAR. WARS 


THE SCAVENGER’S HANDBOOK 


A GUIDE TO SALVAGE IN THE GALAXY 


Inspired by 


Si 


THE SCAVENGER’S HANDBOOK 


A GUIDE TO SALVAGE IN THE GALAXY 


Allen Nunis/Carios Garzon 


Development: Mike Fraley 
Cover art: Lucasfilm Ltd. 
Interior art: Lucasfilm Ltd., Allen Nunis with Carlos Gazron 


Special thanks to Phil Hatfield, David Stairs, Chris Campbell, 
Jamie Collins, Jens-Arthur Leirbakk, 
and Eric Nordquist for their suggestions and ideas. 


Inspired by 
WEST 

he END 
wAGAMES 


All references to Star Wars, or any of the Star Wars films, characters, creatures, vehicles, droids, or other related content are ®, TM & © Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL) and the 
Walt Disney Corporation. All Rights Reserved, Trademarks of LFL, and Disney, are not used with any express permission of the holder. In no way does the 
supplement intend to represent itself (as an entity) as licensed propriety of the license holder or trademark owner. This document is a “fan work” and is provided as 
a free exchange of information under a Creative Commons license. Open D6 System is a copyright/license free, “open” system, no copyright is asserted on the 
system mechanics, text, graphic design, art, or any other aspect of this document. All images and text contained herein which have not been created by the author 
and are the property of the entities listed above have been sourced from freely-available and widely distributed internet sources with no intent to infringe on 
protected material, and citations have been made wherever possible. 


Mi The Salvager’s Life 


Introduction 


At a first glance, salvaging looks like little 
more than garbage picking and scavenging one’s 
way through the galaxy; taking an easy way out 
of digging through debris to make a quick credit. 
This illusion has seduced far too many free 
traders who, having fallen on hard times, 
swallowed their pride to do what they could to 
make some sort of living. They made the 
mistake of believing the illusion until mired in 
government bureaucracy, ending up at the 
wrong end of a claim jumper’s blaster, and 
floundering with their dealings with the black 
market underbelly of the galaxy. All too often 
they find that a salvager’s life is one of far more 
risks than rewards. 

This supplement will help gamemasters 
introduce salvagers into their current Star Wars 
game, or perhaps develop new campaigns 
around a scavenger’s life. The statistics and 
game information is presented during the time 
of the Galactic Empire. The general assumption 
is that the galaxy is ruled by an oppressive and 
callous regime, and the players are struggling 
against the structures of political power as well 
as hostile rivals in the universe. However, 
gamemasters can adapt the information for use 
in other eras of play. 


Starting Out 


There is a single, most common mistake that 
any free trader-come-scavenger makes: 
assuming anyone can wander out into the galaxy 
and claim an unmanned wreck as his own and 
walk away with what he wants. Finders keepers 
is the rule of the galaxy right? While there is a 
kernel of truth in this misperception, it is only a 
kemel. After all, there are laws concerning who 
can legally do salvaging expeditions, when a 
disabled ship becomes legally salvageable, and 


what ships may participate in the salvage 
missions. 


Salvage Licenses 

Nothing is ever free, not even if it has been 
abandoned in space for a century with no living 
being to lay claim to it. If there is money to be 
made, then someone else wants a cut - 
especially the Empire. Where some beings 
resort to thievery, threats, or other messier forms 
of persuasion, the Empire’s method is that of 
fees and licenses, and plenty of them. Any ship 
captain beginning a salvage expedition must first 
register for a galactic standard salvager’s license. 
Usually, these are available at any galactic level 
starport with Bureau of Ships and Services 
(BoSS). Any starship captain capable of 
providing a Ship’s Operating License, and a 
Captain’s Accredited License - assuming the 
captain has already paid the application fees for 
them, that is - can then apply for a License for 
Acquisition of Abandoned Property (LAAP). 
Going through normal channels it costs 750 
credits and takes approximately a galactic 
standard week to process. During this time, 
Imperial desk workers perform background 
checks on the captain and check the ship’s 
transponder code for any major infractions. 
Some have managed to hasten the process by 
paying an “expedition fee” of anywhere between 
500 credits up to a few thousand if a petty 
Imperial bureaucrat is sufficiently persuaded to 
rush the background check. The LAAP must be 
renewed annually to stay current. 


In addition to the LAAP registration, the 
Empire has a separate registration for any 
starship undertaking salvaging expeditions. Most 
independent starship captains see this for the 
redundancy that it is. Though corporate salvage 
company owners find it easier to acquire their 
personal license, and then file for a Salvage 


————— 


m T 
|| 


Starship Permit (SSP) for each starship in the 
company’s fleet. Nonetheless, some 
independent captains often find the value of 
paying for the SSP. Any ship suspected of pulling 
illegal salvage are subject to boarding by patrols, 
having their crew 
questioned, cargo and 
manifest examined, and any 
number of minor infractions 
logged and fines issued. Any 
ship not broadcasting its SSP 
along with its transponder 


can be considered computer with 
“suspected” of illegal 
salvage, and thus prone to Do they try 


petty harassment by 
sufficiently bored or 
particularly bullying patrols. 
Broadcasting the SSP 
removes some level of 
potential suspicion - 
whether real or imagined — and provides a 
salvage crew with a bit more leeway during its 
operation. Also, any ship that has filed for an SSP 
is also allowed to file for an advanced weapons 
and shielding permit in order to better fend off 
claim jumpers. If the owner pays the weapons 
permit fee, they are eligible to install a single 
military-grade energy weapon on the starship. 
The application for the Salvage Starship Permit is 
500 for starfighter scale vessels, and up to 2,000 
credits for capital scale vessels. 

Independent starship crews operating 
without a license or a starship permit are subject 
to penalties for a Class Four infraction, with fines 
from 1,000 to 5,000 credits. In some cases the 
captain has been subject to a few months to a 
year of imprisonment. 


Forging Registrations 

Filing for all of these forms and permits also 
assumes that the captain has nothing to hide. 
Should a starship captain wish to avoid all of 
these legal hassles she could opt for taking on a 
number of illegal hassles. A clever forger can 
create a permit and registration as easily as the 
Empire can issue one, but the cost is much 


Adventure Idea 


During an illegal salvage after 
a battle with Rebel forces, the 
characters find a navigational 


coordinates to a Rebel base. 
to sell the and 
information? If so, to which 
side? Alternatively, might they 
join up to offer their services? 


higher. For a convincing forgery one can pay 
anywhere from 4,000 to anywhere above 10,000 
credits. Convincingly encoding an SSP with the 
ship’s transponder is one thing. Breaking into the 
computer security systems to implant convincing 
matching records is another. 
It requires skills most 
freighter captains lack. Even 
if the captain has the funds, 
dealing with the less 
scrupulous members of 
society comes with a cost 
beyond credits. Should one 
forgo legalities altogether 
attempt to salvage 
without any permits at all, 
the captain restricts himself 
to dealing outside the major 
patrolled space lanes where 
ships blaster cannons 
become the rule of law, and 
selling mostly to shadow ports where organized 
crime is the way of life. In the most unsavory 
shadow ports the crime is not even organized, 
and there is no rule or code beyond what a 
person can do and what he cannot do. Such a 
way Of life is not for the green starship captain. It 
is either for the very brave or the very stupid. 


retrievable 


Making a Claim 


Now that you have license, a ship, and a 
crew you are finally ready to start turning a profit. 
But where do you look? How can you tell if 
something is salvageable, and when can you 
legally make a salvage claim? First, you must 
understand that there are some guidelines 
determining who can salvage what, and when a 
being can make a claim. Imperial law states a 
ship or other property must be kept out of space 
lanes, and can only be unattended for a 
reasonable period of time. Any property that is 
abandoned is fair game for salvagers. Of course 
what “reasonable” and “abandoned” means is 
up for interpretation, and generally depends on 
where the potential salvage is. 


————— 


SS -y y 
Å—ARE 


In-system Salvage Claims 

Most planetary regulations state that a ship or 
wreckage cannot be left in orbit to block space 
traffic. On outer worlds, ships or wreckage are 
not considered abandoned for approximately a 
standard galactic week. The closer to the major 
planets the time frame collapses to a narrow 
band ranging from 36-50 standard hours. If a 
crew must abandon ship, the owner must begin 
to take action quickly or risk losing her ship. If 
the captain is very lucky she may find that her 
ship has only been impounded by local officials. 
If the authorities are too preoccupied keeping 
the peace, fending off pirates, or simply 
harassing spacers, the local prefecture may 
allow a subcontracted or independent salvage 
corporation to collect the ship and store it 
privately. Many less scrupulous corporate 
salvage companies have made tidy profits by 
charging storage fees to captains who did not get 
a damaged ship to a stardock within a 
“reasonable” time frame. 

Once the reasonable time frame has expired, 
or if the owner has officially waived claim to the 
remains of a starship, a salvager may move to 
the wreckage site and begin processing the 
debris. Most planetary bodies have policies that 
once a salvager has made a claim in system, 
then the salvager must completely clear the 
debris. This prevents single-minded salvagers 
from poking into the wreckage to make off with 
a few choice items, leaving the navigational 
hazard for someone else to deal with. Planetary 
systems are most concerned with keeping the 
space ways free hazards, and keeping the steady 
flow of star traffic going. Because of these 
restrictions, it is almost always planet-based 
salvage businesses that file for in-system claims. 
Some are even contracted with the local 
planetary government to keep the space ways 
clean. 


Interplanetary Space Lane Claims 
Any trader knows that there are favored 
hyperspace routes from one system to the next. 


Occasionally accidents happen, clashes with 
pirates leave remains of crippled ships, and 
various other incidents create debris fields. The 
likelihood of these fields creating a mass 
shadow large enough to pull a ship from 
hyperspace is relatively slim. So it there is 
seldom any pressing need to clear the debris 
field. But there is also no harm done in letting 
someone else reclaim the mess. That assumes, 
of course, that the original owners are not 
coming back to sort out part of the wreckage. 
Many times when cargo shipments do not arrive 
at their destinations the intended recipients go 
looking for the remains hoping to cut some of 
the losses on the trip. Thus, the standard of a 
“reasonable” time frame still remains in effect. 
In major hyperspace routes the reasonable time 
frame also depends on how well traveled the 
area is and how close the region is to an 
inhabited world. Most sector authorities allow 
anywhere from one week to one month to file a 
claim for damaged property or a disabled 
starship. Salvagers are encouraged to use their 
best judgment while scanning for engine 
emissions, remnants of energy discharge, or any 
records that may be recoverable from a ship’s 
log. Any crew finding a starship intact must copy 
the log to determine the last date of entry. If a 
reasonable time frame has passed, then the 
debris or starship is open for a salvager to post a 
claim. 

In actuality, this is one of the least 
enforceable set of laws. Though some cargo 
crews are able and wiling to wait out an 
appropriate amount of time, there is little to stop 
them from taking what they find in the galactic 
flotsam without posting a claim. If a starship is 
found intact but disabled, then the less 
scrupulous have little difficulty doctoring the 
logs. If the crew finds cargo that is not highly 
traceable, there is little to say where it came 
from or when. Such illegal salvage is a Class 
Three galactic infraction. Patrols will arrest the 
crew, impound the vessel, and the crew may be 
subject with up to two years of imprisonment 
and up to a 5,000 credit fine. This, of course, 


———— 


a + Y 
0 | 2. 


assumes that someone is actually picked up by a 
patrol. 


Deep Space Salvage Claims 

Far out in the dark comers of the galaxy, far 
from trade routes or inhabited systems there are 
vast amounts of inadequately charted and 
untraveled space. Here there are few onlookers 
and little legal oversight. Most of the same 
practical and legal guidelines from interplanetary 
trade routes also apply to deep space salvage. 
However, the time it required before a ship is 
declared abandoned is usually between a month 
and two months. If a ship is destroyed or 
disabled, it could take a life pod a matter of 
weeks to reach a safe port, and thus salvage 
regulations allow for adequate time for a crew to 
reclaim their losses. 

The possibilities for the scavengers of the 
galaxy are nearly endless. Uncharted space 
battles, ships lost in hyperspace, and long- 
abandoned space stations are potentially there 
for the taking. Of course, there is also the 
potential for cubic light years of absolutely 
nothing. Still, with tales of lost cruise liners, 
legendary forgotten battlefields, and so much 
more, the temptation to venture out in hopes of 
striking it big is ever present. And these galactic 
vultures are all too willing to endure the weeks 
and months of boredom at the controls. 


Filing a Claim 
Imperial regulations state legally salvageable 
materials must first be marked with a 
navigational hazard beacon. This warns other 
ships not to venture into the area lest they risk a 


collision. Once the crew places a beacon, the 
salvagers may report to the nearest galactic level 
starport to file a claim. The © starport 
governmental office registers the claim with the 
captain’s name (or corporate name), the 
starships collecting the materials, the 
coordinates of the salvage, the general contents 
of the debris field, and the galactic stardate of 
the claim. The captain or crew may return to the 
same or another government clerk to update the 
file to keep the claim current. Any salvage claim 
expires after the wreckage is completely cleared 
or if the salvager has abandoned the area for one 
standard year. Abandonment of a salvage area is 
defined as letting the claim expire, regardless of 
whether the salvager continues to visit the area. 
Filing costs 100 credits per claim for the first year 
and 50 for each subsequent renewal. 

That is the official procedure, of course. The 
unofficial modes of operation are usually quite 
different. Few salvagers are willing to drop a 
beacon capable of alerting other starships to the 
claim. Doing so only invites claim jumpers to 
swoop in before the salvager may return from a 
starport claims office. Those who leave beacons 
modify the broadcast range to an area that 
extends just barely beyond the debris field. This 
satisfies the letter of the law without alerting 
miscreants from getting any early pickings. Also, 
most salvagers will file a post hoc claim. Once 
they have dropped a beacon - if one is dropped 
at all — they will investigate the potentials of the 
flotsam, and take the best pickings with them to 
the starport to sell as soon as the claim is filed. 
When a starport official or customs officer 
catches a captain doing so, the offender is 


Adventure Idea 


A salvage vessel comes on a field of years-old debris, and begins passive collection. While sorting, the 
characters find a military grade space-ejection suit with a body in it. The identification card reveals a 
pilot who had a distinguished military career. A man won a major appointment to a government office 
three weeks ago leaning on the credentials and identity of the deceased pilot. So, if the man with the 


credentials is dead, who is the man in office? What do the characters do with this information? Extort 
the man in office? Sell it to an information dealer? Try to ignore the information? 


———— 


m 
Ā—RE 


seldom punished in any official capacity Rather, 
the captain pays a small “off the books fine” — 
also known as a bribe for officials to look the 
other way for such a minor infraction. Should a 
licensed salvager with no outstanding warrants 
forgo the official procedures and begin collecting 
without filing a claim or dropping a beacon, it 
qualifies as a Class Five infraction with fines 
commonly set at 500 credits for less traveled 
regions. In-system or high traffic areas carry fines 
of up to 1,500. 


Claim Jumping 

A ship’s crew found acquiring any materials 
in an area claimed by a licensed salvage crew is 
considered theft, and the guilty parties are 
subject to charge with a Class Two infraction. 
This means impound of the salvage vessel, 
imprisonment of up to 10 years, and fines of up 
to 10,000 credits. In highly patrolled areas, the 
rule of Imperial law is a realistic deterrent. In the 
remote areas of the galaxy, claim jumpers have 
the wrath of the original claimant to deal with. 
Any starship with a valid SSP is licensed to carry 
limited military-grade weaponry and shielding 
and there are no restrictions on blasting another 
salvager pushing in on your claim. The claim 
jumper’s ship just becomes another part of the 
debris field. 

Still, claim jumping happens more often than 
the honest salvager likes to admit. Some will 
simply wait for the original claimant to leave for 
refueling, restocking, or to unload the new 
acquisitions. Once the rightful owner is gone, the 
claim jumper takes a few sweeps, or looks for 
particularly enticing hardware that the honest 
salvager may have missed. Other claim jumpers 
use much more devious methods to make a 
claim and put the law on their side. Some claim 
jumpers will install relatively fast hyperdrives so 
that if they find a navigational beacon, they can 
destroy it, replace it with one of their own, and 
make a hyperspace jump back to a stardock 
before the original salvager can make it there. 
Once the first salvager arrives she is alarmed and 
dismayed to find that someone else just claimed 
that section of space within a matter of days or 


hours before. Alternatively, if word leaks out that 
someone has found a particularly lucrative stash, 
some claim jumpers are not above using 
technological skullduggery to their advantage. 
Electronically breaking in to a government 
clerk’s secure files is no easy task, but it can be 
done. Once inside, the data can be altered, 
affixing the claim jumper’s personal and starship 
data to the file. If the claim jumpers skills are up 
to endeavor and if the electronic paperwork is 
convincing enough a forgery, then the jumper 
can prosecute the original claimant. Since this 
requires altering several data entries to prove 
that one person, and not another has been 
making trips to a salvage field, it is simply easier 
to alter the dates on the records to make it 
appear as though the claim has expired, and it is 
now open salvage again. 

Regardless of tactics, a claim jumper is wise 
not to haunt any given claim too long. Though 
independent salvagers tend to be solitary people, 
they are not above banding together to eliminate 
a common threat. Claim jumpers are despised 
by all remotely decent beings. And most beings 
tend to protect their claims well when they 
suspect claim jumpers are cutting into profits. 

Working with starship wreckage can be a 
dangerous job and bring you into contact with 
hazardous - even explosive - materials. 
Salvagers have known to seed their fields with 
impromptu explosives when they expect to be 
away for a length of time. Tampering with a 
starship reactor core to make it prone to 
detonation, or disguising unexploded military 
munitions are reasonably common practices. 
The scavenger-turned-saboteur knows where to 
find her traps and disarms them before 
continuing the operation. The newly arrived 
claim jumper does not have that luxury. 

Other salvagers are less subtle. Some are 
known to power their ships down and wait 
amongst the debris if they suspect someone 
slipping in between visits to their claim. If the 
hunch proves to be right, the stage is set for an 
ambush. Even others, the less subtle have simply 
found the identity of the claim jumper and buy 


———— 


a T 
0 || 2. 


them a drink at a nearby starport and serve a 
blaster bolt as a chaser. 


Military Salvage 

Though one is free to pick through almost 
any bits of space trash one may find drifting 
about, there are a few places salvagers may not 
go. The first is historical battle sites. When the 
Empire decides that a site has become a 
monumental part of galactic history, it may 
declare it an historical battlefield. Many times 
this is a stage for the Imperial Ministry of 
Propaganda to launch a new campaign touting a 
long string of victories. Most sites that have 
existed long enough to become historical have 
already been picked over to some degree. 
However, on the rare occasion that a battle site 
has actually stood the test of time and showed to 
be worth historical value, the remains are 
preserved for posterity. 


Military salvage from contemporary 
skirmishes carries its own restrictions. Neither 
the Sector Moffs nor the officers of the Imperial 
Navy are fool enough to let just anyone latch 
onto the remains of a Star Destroyer or a gunship 
and make off with functional capital-class 
turrets. However, the Imperial Navy seldom 
performs its own salvage missions, but normally 
contracts out that work. The salvagers are most 
often corporate entities that have been 
thoroughly vetted for their loyalty to the Empire, 
and extensive background’ checks are 
performed on all members of the business as 
well as their family members. Any hint of 
disloyalty or association with unfavorable 


individuals will nullify a military contract - and 
incite more severe interrogations. Once the 
Empire has given approval for a salvage 
company to perform services on military 
restricted sites, the salvage company has an 
expectation of returning all salvageable material 
to its rightful owner. Any enemy combatant ships 
are to be dismantled, and any flight recorder 
data, navigational computer data, or any 
sensitive information is not to be accessed at any 
time by the salvage company. A military salvage 
contract can be very lucrative, though the 
Empire only pays the salvage agency on 
commission, rather than by the market value of 
the items. Further, in times of peace, military 
collections are few and far between. Fortunately 
for salvage corporations, peace between the 
Imperial military regime and the Rebellion is 
nowhere in sight! 


Similar to restrictions on military salvage, 
there are also restrictions on any salvage claim 
on all Imperial-owned ships. Any type of salvage 
on any Imperial shuttle, courier, or cargo vessel 
is strictly prohibited, and may only be carried out 
by vetted salvage companies or individuals. This 
restriction also applies to any independent 
vessels contracted to carry Imperial cargo. 
Where most abandoned or destroyed vessels 
will eventually be declared legally abandoned, 
Imperial or government contracted ships always 
remain the property of the Galactic Empire. Any 
attempt to retrieve items from such ships is 
considered theft of Imperial property, is a Class 
Two infraction, and carries a penalty of 10 years 
imprisonment. 

Though salvaging Imperial ships is illegal, 
there are no innate restrictions on salvaging 
refuse ejected from Imperial ships. One would 
think such legislation ought to be unnecessary, 
as who in their right minds would go looking in 
space for government trash? However, it is 
standard Imperial procedure to dump their 
garbage before they go to light speed. Though 
Star Destroyers and other cruisers are not likely 


to dispose of a working or repairable laser turret, 
there are often little treasures amongst the 
drifting mass. For example coolant gas tanks are 
disconnected from their systems once they 

reach 20% to create a buffer against a 
dangerous meltdown. The “empty” tank is 
exchanged for a full tank before the techs 
discard the low tank. A salvager collecting five 
such tanks may have the remaining coolants 
pumped and refill one of the tanks at maximum 
capacity. Periodically a Star 

Destroyer or other patrol craft may also 
hastily discard perfectly serviceable replacement 
parts and other useful gear. The reason for this is 
that Imperial craft and particularly over-funded 
military ships allocate as much space to such 
cargo as they possibly can. When being 
prepared for military engagements, the ships are 
to be stocked full of replacement and repair 
parts. Many times power actuators, blast door 
servos, and other parts are stocked in crates in 
multiple units. If the techs are in a hurry to make 
room for restocking, they will periodically trash 
containers that are only one third full. Though 

such wastefulness would shock the average 
citizen if they knew, the prodigal regime is not 
particularly concerned with the general 
populace’s opinion of how their extraordinarily 
high taxes are spent. However, the general 


—————— 


citizen’s loss may be the salvager’s gain. The 
savviest scavengers are able to recover and 
repackage discarded equipment, and some are 
even able to sell them back to the Empire via 
legal suppliers. 


Salvage Collection Methods 


A variety of collection methods are common 
in the galaxy, all of them require specialized 
equipment. It would behoove the salvager to 
plan what sort of salvage she will be doing and 
outfit herself accordingly. Few salvagers devote 
themselves to one type to complete exclusion to 
the others, though salvagers are known to gear 
their ships and crew to one type but will engage 
on other collection methods if the pickings look 
particularly favorable, or to help them through 
harder times. Generally speaking there are three 
types of collection methods, in toto, targeted 
salvage, and passive collection. 


In Toto 
As mentioned above, there are some cases 
where an entire debris field needs to be 
collected and processed. It may come from a 
need for clearing a navigational hazard from 
traveled space, or possibly the Empire may want 
an entire remains of a ship recovered and 


processed for forensic study. Regardless of the 
motive, when a salvager clears an entire area of 
all debris, it is referred to salvage in toto, as the 
totality is removed from space. 

In toto salvage is most often conducted by 
contract, usually by corporate entities, or sub- 
contracted to other independent salvagers. Most 
frequently there is at least one capital-scale 
vessel first using plasma torches to slice the 
larger sections of hull to manageable sections, 
and then storing them away in the massive cargo 
holds. Occasionally the remains of disabled 
starfighter-scale starships may be towed in their 
entirety to a port where they can either be 
disassembled or disposed of. Such towing also 
qualifies as in toto salvage. 


Targeted Salvage 

Though the large remains of a starship loom 
in the viewport of a scavenger’s ship, he may not 
want the whole vessel. A large star liner sitting 
derelict in the vacuum of space may not be 
something that a salvager has the resources or 
interest to restore to working order. However, a 
ship full of functional parts may be something in 
which she has a keen interest. Looking in a 
salvage field or a disabled starship for select 
items, and bringing them aboard is called 
targeted salvage. The crew only targets certain 
items for collection. The rest is left and may hold 
no interest for that particular salvager. Yes, 
sections of the hull may be remade into hull 
patches for other ships, true the wiring can be 
stripped out and either recycled or resold, but 
some salvagers are looking for items that hold a 
particular interest. Maybe they are looking for 
remaining cargo still in the hold. Perhaps they 
want only the sensor systems. Or they just might 
be looking for something a little more elicit left 
tucked away in some comer of the remains. 
Nonetheless, the salvager doing targeted 
collection is usually on a mission for something, 
or certain kinds of property. 


ee 
8 || 2. 


Passive Collection 

In contrast to targeted salvage, passive 
collection is for the salvager who wants to spend 
less of his time doing space walks, and is happy 
enough to let his ship drift through a debris field 
as automated systems pick up nearly everything 
in range of the ship. Sometimes these collection 
systems are computer-controlled appendages 
linked with the ship’s sensor systems to pick up 
debris capable of fitting through apertures in the 
hull. Such systems have varying levels of 
sophistication; some will pick up anything within 
range, others will be more selective. At any rate, 
the salvager is scavenging for more or less 
anything and is not particular about what he 
brings on board. After the mass of debris is in the 
cargo hold, it must be separated and sorted. The 
sorting varies from salvager to salvager. Some 
have collecting areas for working parts, 
repairable pieces of technology, and refuse. 
Others are hoping to make a small profit by 
turning the materials over to reclamation centers 
to be recycled, and thus must be sorted by types 
of materials. Those wishing to peddle scrap 
metals likewise have to sort by composition. He 
may put duroplast in Hold A: Section], narrilium 
alloy in Hold C: Section 2, and so on. Of course 
there are breeds of scavengers whose 
“organization methods” elude any rational being. 

Passive collection seems easier at the onset. 
There is less risk involved insofar as one need 
not leave the safety and comfort of the ship. 
There are no dangerous spacewalks into 
unstable hulls of broken ships. Though for those 
with less sophisticated sensors, there is risk in 
terms of what they bring on board. If the captain 
is not diligent with sensor sweeps, he may very 
well bring onboard radioactive or other 
hazardous materials. There is less time spent in 
the hunt for just the right kind of cargo, but the 
passive collection means the crew spends 
innumerable hours sorting through the collection 
area trying to figure out what is on board, and 
what the value of such items may or may not be. 


10 


Corporate and Independent 


Salvage Operations 


Generally speaking, if one expects to begin a 
salvage business, there are two major models 
represented in the galaxy. One may either 
belong to a larger salvage corporation, or one 
may belong to an independent salvage crew. 
Both have different methods of operation and 
both have different views of the other. 


Corporate Salvage 

Most larger planetary bodies have at least 
one resident salvage corporation. Sometimes 
the operation is locally owned, and other times 
it is just an office of a larger sector-wide 
business or galactic mega corporation. Though 
the power structures and modes of operation 
will vary as widely as any type of corporation, 
there are some general themes that span 
corporate salvage operations. Usually the 
company is headed by an individual or small 
board of beings who either handle or delegate 
the day to day operations. Such companies own 
multiple ships, and often operate at least one 
capital-class starship per sector. In areas where 
navigational anomalies make starship collisions 
more likely, some corporate entities have at least 
one capital ship on a planet with a corporate 
office. Such fleets might initially seem 
extravagant, as starship accidents do not happen 
every day, but many spacefaring beings know 
how useful a reliable salvage company can be. 
Should a ship’s sublight engines become 
disabled, or should a crew be forced to abandon 
ship because of a failing life support system, 
salvage companies are easy to contact, and tow 
the crippled ship to a nearby starport. Because of 
larger operation’s capability of taking ships in 
toto, salvage operations become the primary 
towing agencies in civilized space. As has 
already been mentioned, incorporated bodies 
are also trusted by local governments to keep 
space lanes clear of hazardous debris, are 
eligible for government and military contracts. 
Corporate bodies are also more likely to conduct 
in toto salvage. Not only because they handle in- 


0 || 2. 


system wrecks, but because they have large 
enough of an employee base to make sorting 
debris worthwhile. Many have the resources to 
collect metals for reclamation and either sell 
them, or melt the metals down for easier storage 
once cooled. Stored metals are often kept for 
speculation on the market, waiting for some 
alloys to rise in value enough to make tuming 
them in en masse more profitable. 


Adventure Idea 


The adventurers find a bulk freighter intact 
drifting in space. Scans show life support is 
inactive and no life signs aboard. All escape pods 
are in their proper bays. When the characters 


board the vessel they find that the ship was 
smuggling military-grade Clone-Wars era droids. 
The droids had killed the crew, and now they will 
attempt to exterminate the new boarders and cut 
off every chance of their escape. 


Because of the nature of corporate licensing, 
not every individual star pilot needs to have a 
salvager’s LAAP (License to Acquire Abandoned 
Property). For all practical purposes, the 
corporation must obtain a single LAAP and 
register for a SSP for each starship in the 
corporate fleet. However, a corporate LAAP 
carries a greater cost. It is only $5,000 for any 
operation of 50 employees or less, but goes up 
considerably for entities of a larger employment 
base. The SSP (Starship Salvage permit) carries 
the same registration costs for private individuals 
and corporate salvagers, though every ship in a 
corporate fleet must carry a current SSP. 

The life of the corporate salvager is much 
like any other labor job in the galaxy. In larger 
companies here is a need for custodial 
personnel, clerical workers in addition to 
qualified pilots, mechanics, and many beings 
willing to do the hours of grunt work necessary 
to get the job done. The corporate salvager is 
more likely to expect steady pay regardless of 
what kinds of jobs the corporation takes. The 
average worker is not getting paid by the job, 


11 


and there is considerably less risk, but also 
much less freedom than a member of an 
independent salvage crew. The corporate 
salvage pilots and space-based crews often look 
at independent salvagers with some suspicion. 
They often perceive themselves as hard-working 
beings trying to make an honest credit. By 
contrast, they see the independents as treasure 
hunters aimlessly drifting from wreck to wreck. 
Corporate salvagers commonly portray the 
independents as vultures trying to take the most 
valuable morsels for themselves, and leaving the 
rest of the remains to be the galaxy’s problem. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters come upon an ancient 
derelict craft. Among the many strange and 
potentially valuable artifacts, they discover an 


ancient Sith in suspended animation. 
Unfortunately, the characters’ activities on the 
ship have awakened her, and they discover 
her cruelty and lust for power. 


Independent Salvage 

Independent salvagers are not unlike the 
tramp freighter crews of the galaxy. Some have 
finally worked their way up to purchasing their 
very own starship. Whether acquired through 
loans or hard earned credits, the starship is the 
key to a new way Of life. It is a free life where the 
boundaries are as far as the distant reaches of 
space. From there, the experiences and 
motivations of individual salvagers vary greatly. 
Some were originally free traders who had fallen 
on hard times and found a lucky break by 
stumbling on to a claim. Others sought solitude 
and found that with a few labor droids they 
could sustain themselves liberated from the 
constraints of more civilized sectors of space. 
Occasionally, there are scavengers who simply 
love the thrill of the hunt. They enjoy pouring 
over scanners and readouts hoping to come 
upon the next exciting find. Others follow the 


0 || 2. 


history of lost ships and crews, counting on the 
vacuum of space to preserve the long-lost 
wreckage. For such crews the mystery of what 
happened in the final moments of a dying ship is 
almost as exciting as the salvage itself. 

There are a few constants in an independent 
salvager’s life. There is always a perceived need 
of secrecy. When one stumbles on a reasonably 
exploitable find, there is always the fear - or in 
some cases, paranoid delusions — of claim 
jumpers finding it as well. Anyone coming back 
to the same port with holds full of functional 
equipment is going to get some notice. Often 
salvagers will travel from port to port as to avoid 
drawing attentions to themselves. The more 
paranoid will make numerous hyperspace 
jumps to and from their precious finds to keep 
their movements from becoming traceable. 
Salvagers are also constantly under the scrutiny 
of port authorities and galactic patrols. Piles of 
seemingly random equipment make good hiding 
places, and more than a few would-be salvagers 
are little more than smugglers parading as 
honest businessmen. Where a corporate 
salvager may have a reasonable expectation of a 
steady flow of credits, the independent is living 
depends on what she finds or fails to find. Ships 
need to be refueled, docking fees need to be 
paid, ship systems always need repairs at the 
worst times, and salvage ship crews need to 
have profits to split. Independent salvage ships 
are only three missed meals away from a 
mutiny. 

The independent salvager does have a few 
opportunities that a corporate entity may never 
receive. It is not uncommon for a cargo 
company to hire a salvager to investigate a 
missing shipment. Whether because of pirate 
attacks, hyperspace mishaps, or one of a 
thousand different kinds of incidents, shipments 
go missing from time to time. Rather than waste 
time and resources on tracking down the 
missing craft, the cargo shippers often contact a 
salvage crew, provide them with the last known 
coordinates and intended hyperspace route, and 
pay them to bring back sensor scan data and any 
recoverable materials. Occasionally cargo 


12 


survives relatively intact, even if the ship is no 
longer serviceable. A seller may want to avoid a 
larger salvage company for any number of 
reasons. Sometimes those reasons deal with 
privacy and the corporate secrecy surrounding 
the cargo in question. Other times less than legal 
shipping operations are in play and if a local 
salvage company is known to be sympathetic to 
the Empire they could pose a significant risk. 
When the shipment is arranged by organized 
criminals to ship elicit goods, and hiring an 
individual or small crew helps ensure that the 
company can also buy the salvager’s silence. 
Regardless of the reasons stemming from the 
contract, many discreet recovery operations are 
given to independent smugglers. However, 
dealing with such elements involves a certain 
amount of danger. Dealing with organized crime 
may come with a high risk or with further strings 


attached later on. Even legal operations 
demanding high levels of secrecy involve 
corporate espionage, and there is some 


information that some beings would be willing 
to kill for. 

Despite the risks, the majority of the galaxy’s 
independent salvagers prefer a life of wandering 
to being planet-bound to a corporate master. 
True, their lives may be harder than they would 
have wished, but they are their own masters. If 
trading quips with corporate salvagers at the 
local spacer’s cantina, the independents are 
likely to say that the corporate employees hardly 
belong in the establishment. A spacer’s cantina 
is a place for actual spacers, and not one who 
hitches a ride on the big boss’s ship. The view of 
corporate salvagers is of one who has accepted 
a limited mundane life that is only a vague 
shadow of the independent’s work. The 
independent requires true grit to be rewarded 
with freedom instead of comfort. 


Buyers 
Collecting salvage amounts to very little 
unless the salvager can turn it into some sort of 
profit. While there is some degree of useless 
refuse that winds up in a salvager’s hold, the 


|| 2. 


purpose of the collection is to sell the valuable 
materials. There are any number of beings in the 
galaxy who may want some of the obscure 
pieces and parts found in the far reaches of 
space, but the salvager is challenged with the 
task of getting the goods to those who want it. As 
much as a salvager may be able to obtain 
valuable items, it does him no good unless he 
knows who to turn to when trying to turn those 
collections into credits. 


Junk Dealers 

While most purveyors of secondhand and 
refurbished goods would never deign to call 
their wares junk, most of the rest of the galaxy 
calls it as they see it. However, ship captains 
tend to see that “junk” a little differently when 
their ships need repairs and no one else has a 
Type J-2 hyperdrive. And where do such 
secondhand parts come from? In fact they come 
from many places, but good salvagers know that 
junk dealers will always have a need for intact 
starship components. For those salvagers with a 
skilled technician a part of their crew, many 
collected parts can be repaired even if they were 
not completely functional when first collected. 
Such pieces do not garner as much attention 
from the junk dealers, but when dealing in 
components that have been out of production 
for some time, even refurbished pieces can 
bring credits in. Most salvagers try to establish a 
relationship with a few junk dealers in various 
locations and then make the circuit between 
them when the holds are full. 


13 


Some of the more successful salvagers will 
open their own junk shop on a planet or space 
station within reasonable distance of their 
claims. Less commonly some will try to 
temporarily set down on a planet and try to 
unload wares directly to starship techs in need of 
repair parts. However, spacers are more likely to 
trust an established business - even if only 
marginally more so. Unscrupulous traveling 
scavengers are just as likely to sell you a bad 
load of parts and be off to the next system by 
mid-day as to sell you working components. 
Experienced spacers have learned to be wary of 
such crooks and __half-witted tinkers. 
Nonetheless, salvagers are anxious to seek top 
prices for their collections, and selling them 
directly to the consumer one means of doing so. 


Industry Outposts 

Mining colonies and deep space energy 
collection centers are popular waypoints for 
salvagers. Many such outposts are underfunded 
and poorly supplied. Though the salvager is 
unlikely to have replacement parts for the exact 
models of equipment used at the outpost, the 
workers and techs in these industrial centers are 
very adept at jury rigging and adapting 
equipment for their purposes. Many times such 
outposts will send out a looped transmission for 
continual broadcast inviting salvage vessels, 
especially when they are in particular need for 
replacement parts. 


Tech Shops 

Though junk dealers will take nearly anything 
that barely works, tech and repair bays belong to 
an industry where they depend on their good 
name. Tech shops need to be able to sell quality 
parts and provide reasonable repair services to 
those in need of their wares. Thus, tech shops 
will take items from salvagers, though it is not 
nearly as easy a Sale as it would be with junk 
dealers. Most often a salvager will present repair 
parts that are in high enough demand and meet 
a standard of quality. Techs will conditionally 


m | 
Å—ARE 


accept the gear the salvager gives them, but will 
perform a thorough inspection before offering 
any credits. Usually there is at least a one or two 
day turn around, afterward the salvager may 
return to accept her credits as and take back any 
rejected materials. 


Information Brokers 

Though undamaged cargo, reclaimable ship 
materials, and repair parts are common 
commodities, the physical materials are not the 
only items of interest, and some things carry an 
even greater value. Information brokers 
specialize in evaluating the value of bits of data. 
They either use that information as leverage, or 
sell the information to those who can. The 
question is, what is more valuable to the Empire, 
a Rebellion prototype starfighter hull fragments, 
or a surviving nav computer with coordinates for 
its point of origin? Sector patrols putting together 
an anti-piracy task force may pay a modest 
amount to salvagers that recover flight recorder 
data from attacked ships. At least then they will 
be able to better determine the pirate’s tactics 
and capabilities. There may be any number of 
oddities found on or in ships that could be worth 
something to someone, the information brokers 
will know who and how much they are willing to 
pay. Naturally one can get a higher price from 
the eventual recipient by trying to sell the 
information directly, but most salvagers are not 
connected well enough to know exactly who to 
whom they should sell the information. 
Scavengers are also ill equipped to play the 
dangerous game of using the information 
without putting themselves in harm’s way. 


Arms Dealers 

One of the most dangerous segments of the 
black market involves those who deal in 
restricted or illegal military grade hardware. 
Whether personnel weaponry or capital-scale 
blaster batteries, there are those in the galaxy 
who watch the careful balance of supply and 
demand of illegal arms and are willing to evade 
detection in order to keep their clients well 


14 


equipped. Though the tactics are many and 
varied for transporting the contraband, 
acquisition is always a challenge. Though many 
well-connected dealers have arranged for 
methods of supply from corrupt or inept 
government officials, others have less steady 
methods of getting their hands on the weaponry 
they desire. That is where the salvager comes in. 
Though military salvage is strictly regulated, 
battles sites are often looted before the winning 
side can come to collect materials and 
information. Further, in rare occasions a salvager 
to come upon the remains of archaic battleships 
with sufficient weaponry either intact or 
serviceable. When a salvager removes gun ports, 
batteries, military power sources, ammunition 
caches, and other such materials, they can fetch 
premium prices to paramilitary organizations, 
small militias, and rebel groups. Unfortunately, 
the nature of such organizations is to remain 
hidden lest they receive swift retribution from 
the Imperial authorities. Further, one does not 
simply stride through Imperial patrolled space 
with a hold full of munitions and sell it to the first 
being that has the credits. Such would be a plan 
leading to immediate arrest and charged with 
conspiracy and treason. The salvager punished 
under a Class One infraction such as this would 
mean a minimum of 30 years in prison, and is 
more likely that they would become an enemy 
of the Empire and suffer execution. Transporting 
military-grade good means knowing the right 
channels of information, following paths of 
safehouses, knowing which documents to forge 
(such as falsifying bills of landing, registered 
militia end-use documents, and other such 
necessities), having connections for credit 
laundering, and knowing which officials to bribe 
and not to bribe. Most salvagers do not have the 
slightest idea where to begin in such a process. 
However, an arms dealer is much easier to find 
for those who have associations on the shadier 
side of salvaging. Arms dealers have the 
experience and connections to provide the 
weaponry to those who desire it, though the 
salvager will never earn as good of a price 
through them as they would dealing with the 


m |, 
|| 


recipients directly. Nonetheless, there is much 
less risk selling to such dealers than unloading 
goods to militias directly. Any crew selling 
weapons directly also have another risk. Arms 
dealers are middle men by nature, and they do 
not appreciate a salvager trying to cut them out. 
Almost invariably, those who have an interest in 
arms are bound to notice a salvager who sells 
parts and supplies compatible with military 
ships. Such criminals are likely contact the 
salvager, rather than the other way around. And 
when they arms dealer comes to call, the crew 
can count on an unfriendly reception. 


The Rebel Alliance 

The Empire is well known of its corruption, 
bigotry, merciless retribution to those who 
vocalize against public policy, and steady 
oppression against those who seek to change 
the New Order. It is far from surprising when 
Imperial practices and crooked officials finally 
push a salvager into the open arms of Rebel 
Alliance. The needs of the Rebel Alliance are no 
different than the needs of any active military 
unit. The main difference is that the Alliance 
freedom fighters are poorly funded, under 
equipped, and always looking for new recruits. 
Salvagers are unlikely to see any front line 
fighting, but the Rebels are willing to take 
whatever aid the freedom-loving beings in the 
galaxy are willing to provide. Ships with large 
holds can smuggle goods, transport support 
equipment, and even help transport personnel. 
However, there are more likely tasks for the 
salvager. Every military needs good intelligence, 
and often times the intelligence begins directly 
after a military engagement. When the Rebel 
forces win a victory against the Empire, 
retrieving forensic data on new weaponry, 
recovering flight recorders, and removing 
navigational computers are much desired 
support services. Also, recovering unexpended 
munitions and obtaining salvageable goods 
helps keep the Alliance in supply of badly 
needed materials. 

Of course, aiding and abetting any Rebel 
group will immediately brand the salvager as a 


15 


—————— 


eH y 
|| 


terrorist and enemy of the state. Any such 
activities are listed as Class One infractions and 
carry the death penalty, though it is highly 
unlikely that the salvager would ever see any 
official judicial process. If captured in any Rebel 
activities, the salvager can expect to be 
captured, tortured for information, and simply 
disappear from society. If the salvager is very 
lucky, she will find herself in one of the galaxy’s 
secret penal colonies where she can expect to 
waste away in anonymity. However, it is just as 
likely that she will be processed for information, 
and hastily disposed of. 


Archaic Starship Collectors 

The nobility of the Tapani sector are known 
for their frivolous pastimes. Every foppish fifth 
son of a Baron spends his hours in ways that 
confound the majority of the universe. One such 
diversion for the young nobles is collecting 
antique starships. Some such antiques become 
classics, and others are extraordinarily rare 
oddities. Most ships stand incomplete in a family 
hanger, as the young nobles wait until they can 
finish the products of their labor, ending with a 
functioning ancient ship. Certainly these high- 
born collectors can commission missing 
components for their prize collections, but 
ultimately they strive for original pieces from the 
ancient manufacturers. Most, if not all, of the 
oldest starship manufacturers are no longer in 
operation, and even those that are no longer 
manufacture obsolete components. This leaves 
the privileged dandies of Tapani throwing their 
credits at anyone who can find and deliver 
working parts. Salvagers who stumble on an 
ancient starship adrift in the far reaches of space 
can find a small fortune in a centuries-long 


discontinued part by selling it to a dilettante who 
does not understand the value of his credits, but 
only his own desires to finish the prized starship. 


Used Starship Dealers 

There are some beings in the universe that 
will buy almost anything. Especially so if they 
believe the plausible lies they are told about the 
starship’s past, and used starship dealers are just 
the ones to tell such lies. It would be unfair to 
depict all such starship dealers as such, but a 
good salvager knows where to find the least 
honest sellers. Some ships are taken in foto and 
fetch reasonable prices from the used dealers — 
at least a better price than selling the ship for 
scrap. The dealers will then set their techs on to 
getting the ship in working condition. However, 
the word “working” is often qualified in very 
small print in the bill of sale. Occasionally a used 
starship dealer will accept vessels with multiple 
hull breaches and other heavy damage, though 
the vessel requires intensive labor to become 
spaceworthy again. And even though the dealers 
accept vessels that require days or weeks of his 
techs’ time, there is a point of diminishing 
returns. If he will have to pay his techs more 
than he is expecting out of the starship, he will 
simply pass on the vessel. True, the battered ship 
may see a captain and crew again one day, but it 
may not be worth his time and effort to be the 
one to bring it up to the required minimums for 
spaceworthiness. 


Reclamation Centers 
Pieces of hull, rent blast doors, conductive 
wiring, and starship grade plastics are all 
materials that are in high demand on space 
faring worlds. The process of refining ore into 


Market Rates for Common Metals 


Plasteel Durasteel Transparasteel 
Mill / H 1800 2550 
Mill / L 1620 2295 
Scrap/ H 720 1020 


Scrap/L 648 918 


Bronzium Duranium = Trimantium 


Aluminium 
1900 2650 
1710 2385 
760 1060 
684 954 


the finished product is a long an expensive one. 
Many manufacturers find it just as easy to accept 
recycled materials. Reclamation centers are the 
refiners that accept the used resources and tum 
them into industrial grade materials again. The 
cost of turning blasted hull scraps into something 
appealing to a starship company is higher than 
most being expect. As such the market price for 
scrap metal is relatively low. Though with 
enough volume, a salvager may turn in the 
contents of his holds for a meager profit. Before 
accepting materials for recycling almost all 
centers require the items be sorted. 

The prices a salvager fetches depends on the 
overall galactic market, changes in ore supplies, 
and output capability of the industry. Supply and 
demand also changes from sector to sector. 
What metals may have been valuable last month 
in this sector will be worth considerably less 
next, where it may be more valuable two sectors 
away. As has already been mentioned 
previously, some salvagers may stock cargo 
containers of sorted materials in hopes that the 
market may improve. Because prices vary, most 
captains will check and index of local 
reclamation rates before making port. 


Running a campaign 

Salvage operations introduce countless 
possibilities for gamemasters and players alike in 
a Star Wars campaign. Like tramp freighter 
campaigns, a group of salvagers highlight the 
action and adventures that happen on the fringe 
of the galaxy. The following section will help 
provide some broad guidelines and helpful ideas 
to keep the creative ideas flowing. 

First, remember that adventures can only 
sustain players’ interest if there is sufficient 
challenge, though determining the sort of 
challenge they desire will shape the campaign. If 
the players want to have a financially-driven 
campaign, then the players can feel the burden 
of an independent startup operation. A 
gamemaster can also set several financial 
roadblocks, but also provide ways around the 
normal routes. If the players cannot afford a ship, 


m | 
Ā—RE 


then financing through a loan shark provides a 
reoccurring pressure. The players may not be 
able to navigate the licensing bureau, but find 
that they can perform side-quests for a clerk 
willing to bend a few laws. Also, in a financially- 
driven campaign the players will likely want to 
acquire more wealth to get the newest toy for 
their ship. However, to keep the challenge going, 
the players need to feel the financial squeeze 
often enough to remember that they cannot own 
the galaxy. Port docking fees, constant repairs on 
the ship, refueling costs, and even the basics of 
food and fresh water constantly need to have 
them digging into their credit accounts. If the 
players are willing to splurge for a new toy for 
the starship, one may try throwing their 
extravagance into sharp relief by having 
something go terribly wrong on the next salvage 
mission, requiring a repair or even overhaul of a 
ship system, requiring an expense to repair. 
Remember, keep the finances a challenge, 
without creating a sense of dread or the 
pressures of an undue burden. Keeping up 
vehicle repairs is stress enough in the real world 
that the gamemaster should add high-adventure 
incentives to the finances. There should be a 
constant temptation to earn money on the 
shadier side of the business where the players 
must choose between risky profits or honesty 
money with only meager earnings. The moral 
choice is one that gamemasters should always 
put before the players. The consequences of the 
player’s actions should commonly reflect that 
there are very real costs to shirking moral norms. 
Once they begin dealing with arms dealers, 
there may be expectations to continue being 
suppliers, and the dealers are more than eager 
to react violently to those who do not meet 
expectations. Crime lords and gangsters may 
provide benefits, but they are not friends by any 
means. Such criminals will demand a little quid 
pro quo. The results can be extraordinarily 
dangerous. 

If your players favor plot lines more along the 
paths of galactic level conflict and high 
adventure, there are also plenty of opportunities. 
Usually, such adventures make note of costs and 


17 


credits, but they do not have to focus on them 
quite to such a degree as one would with a 
finance-driven campaign. The tension of the 
galactic threat should take the place of the 
pressure of costs. Such campaigns can focus on 
fighting a foe common to the entire galaxy, such 
as a rising force that could threaten both Empire 
and Rebel Alliance, or perhaps an ancient evil 
awakened on a dark planet in a forgotten sector 
of the galactic disc. In a game where the players 
are fighting an enemy of the free people of the 
universe, the tyrannical rule of the Empire may 
fill this role, though it is not by any means the 
only alternative. There are plenty of ideas for 
helping military forces in their salvage efforts, 
though intelligence gathering, capturing enemy 
technology, and recover of critical materials can 
play a role. However there should also be issues 
of the human spirit in campaigns of galactic 
conflict. If the players do not a story set amongst 
the conflict between Empire and Rebellion, the 

players could salvage bits of information 
about starships periodically going missing, and a 
new model of android can be vaguely 
connected to such disappearances. As the 
players gain more information, they discover a 
mad cyborg slowly replacing major heads of 
state and CEOs of corporations in the cyborg’s 
plot for a revolt of synthetic life forms. 
Regardless of the type of conflict , the 
gamemaster should give the heroes human 
connections and personal investments in 
something outside their ships and ports of call. 
Once the players make those connections, the 
gameaster should move to heighten tension by 
making galactic events threaten the things and 
people that the characters love. 

Regardless of the type of adventures the 
gamemaster plans, she should always keep the 
players on the ropes, so to speak. Yes, the 
players should have rewards and be able to feel 
the thrill of victories, but victory after victory or 
achievements that happen too easily. The 
players need to feel that they are sometimes just 
one step ahead of their enemies, and 
periodically feel as though they are just two 
steps behind in those that challenge them. 


|) 


Note that most of the salvage mentioned in 
the module deals with relatively mundane 
salvage missions. True, the average salvager in 
the galaxy spends most of his time drifting 
through fields of space junk looking for 
otherwise useless things to recycle. However 
your players are not playing those sorts of 
salvagers. They are playing heroes and 
adventurers! Your players will be brushing with 
claim jumpers, encountering bizarre threats that 
have destroyed other ships, solving mysteries of 
unknown destructive potential, and even finding 
ancient alien artifacts. A gamemaster creating a 
campaign for salvagers will not think solely 
about the job, but about the tales that spin off of 
people in that profession. Players should make 
finds that are well out of the norm. Instead of a 
field of debris, they can find ancient starships 
whose crews have been wiped out by a strange 
creature, but a creature that has been dormant 
in the intervening centuries. Alternatively the 
adventurers should find a ship that is completely 
clawed, bitten, and smashed by an enormous 
creature, the likes of which no one has ever put 
on record. The infinite possibilities of rare finds 
make the adventures worth playing, especially 
when each one is enshrouded in mystery and 
danger. 


Adventure Idea 


An old spacer is a long-time friend of the party. 
The locals regard him as a washed-up has- 
been. When the party is away doing a run, the 
old man dies, leaving them his few material 
possessions. Among them is a set of 


coordinates that leads to an aged battle site 


that has never been registered, but has several 
salvageable weapons and pieces of military- 
grade technology. The question is whether the 
characters try to fence the weapons. If they do, 
can they survive the dealings with the black 
market? If they sell directly, how long before 
the black marketers introduce themselves and 
demand their cut? 


18 


Salvager Skills 


Salvaging requires a crew to have a skill set 
somewhat different than the average tramp 
freighter. Though it is true that she may need the 
same piloting skills, and nearly every character 
should have a reasonable amount of dice in 
blaster and dodge, there are several other skills 
players need to consider for their characters. 
Naturally a salvager is only going to be able to 
claim what she can find. She cannot find space 
debris if the ship has insufficient sensors, or if his 
sensors stat is dismally low. Further, once he 
finds a debris field how is he to know what is of 
any use? Though value is an underused skill, it is 
one that will play a major role in a financially- 
oriented campaign. The value skill may also play 
a role in helping a character discover whether or 
not she has discovered a particularly rare 
artifact. Once the character has established the 
value of an item, there is a question of selling it. 
Bargain then becomes a necessary skill. 

The above skill set assumes that the 
character is selling through legal means. If the 
character is attempting to make contacts 
through the black market, the character will 


need a reasonable streetwise skill to help her 
gather information without looking suspicious to 
law enforcement, and without looking like law 
enforcement to the suspicious. Contacting black 
marketers is dangerous on any planet, and 
requires a fairly decent roll to keep from running 
afoul of those that would either take advantage 
of the character or incarcerate her. 

Any salvage ship needs a solid technician. A 
player with a high Technical attribute is essential 
to keeping the ship running, but also provides 
necessary skills for repairing salvaged units. 
Skills such as space transport repair, capital ship 
repair, as well as other repair skills are vital to 
making sure that all the parts are in good 
working order before they are sold. An unhappy 
seller is likely to take out his losses on the crew 
the next time they come to port. 

Finally, those working within the realm of the 
Imperial government clerks should invest well in 
bureaucracy. With the massive salvo of red tape 
and endless petty government workers, any 
player wanting to maintain the mere appearance 
of a legal operation will get more than his 
character points’ worth out of this skill. 


19 


E Hardware 


The shifting drift of space debris is no place 
for a decent person. With nothing between one’s 
face and the cold vacuum of space but a thin 
plasteel visor, it takes a different breed. It is hard 
and dangerous work. Between dodging claim 
jumpers, spacewalks through unstable wrecks, 
and dealing with Imperial bureaucrats trying to 
get their cut, half of the green salvagers give up 
inside a standard year. Either give up or turn up 
in a drift as someone else’s claim. 

But once a being has a LAAP, and SSL 
licenses, she is still not in business. To do the job 
a salvager needs the tools of the trade. A 
standard astromech is of limited use to the 
professional salvager, and a run-of-the-mill 
freighter will only get a being so far. 

To get the job done right a salvager utilizes 
specialized personal equipment, unique labor 
droids, and starship modifications to get the job 
done. 


Personal Equipment 


Tractor Beam Tracking Tags 

Many salvagers have found it immensely 
frustrating to lock on to a specific target with a 
tractor beam, particularly when attempting to 
cherry pick a target in a debris field. Tractor tags 
simplify this process. Usually a space walk is 
required for a being to secure a tractor tag ona 
specific target, allowing the tractor beam gunner 
to lock on to the tag’s signal. This is used to great 
effect when masses of drifting debris would 
otherwise interfere with a tractor beam’s 
operation. The beam can also be set to shut 
down when it does not have direct line of sight 
to the tagged object. Though this becomes a 


AR 
ARST 


slow process as the beam operates in short 
bursts, it allows a crew to acquire a selected 
item with little interference from surrounding 
flotsam. 


E Tractor Tag 
Model: Starfire Inc. Traclock 6 Target Tag 
Type: Tractor beam targeting beacon 
Cost: 250 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Adds +3D to all Starship 
gunnery: tractor beam rolls to any attempt to 
lock on to a space-born object when the 
tractor tag is affixed to it. 


Magna Clamps 

The problem with lifting awkward loads is 
not only just weight, but a matter of hand holds. 
Magna clamps are designed to not only alleviate 
such problems of cumbersome loads, but also 
provide easy attachment points for winch lines, 
and any situation where a handle would be 
useful. Magna clamps are little more than handle 
on a powerful electromagnet. Once powered on, 
the magna clamp affixes securely to the metal 
object. Switching the clamp off easily releases 
the object. 


E Magna Clamp 
Model: Borallis Metalworkings & Materials 
PHJ-05V6 
Type: Magnetic Grip 
Cost: 60 
Availability: 1 
Game Notes: Adds +1D to lifting rolls to lift 
awkward loads. 


Synthrope Guide Line 
Without the conveniences of shipboard lights 
and artificial gravity, a derelict ship is often a 


confusing mess. Even if the spacer is familiar 
with the make and model of ship, he or she can 
get disoriented. Guide line dispensers attach 
easily to most wreck suits and trail a thin, but 
tough strand of synthrope behind the salvager. 
More advanced models even allow the salvager 
to select the color of the dispensed line. This is a 
convenient feature when multiple salvagers are 
tying off on a main line and following different 
paths. In the event of the need for a hasty 
evacuation, the salvage crew need only follow 
their own lines back to the main line and make 
their way to the origin point. While not as strong 
as its climbing-oriented counterparts, the 
guidelines are resistant to breaking when put to 
its intended use. 


H Guide Line 
Model: Czerka PL-52 A Guide Line 
Type: Safety guide line 
Cost: 30 for 250 meters 
Availability: 1 


Jump Bug 

Derelict starships are full of sealed 
bulkheads, unpowered hatches, and deactivated 
ship systems. Small power mobile generators 
and energy cells allow salvagers a way around 
such problems. With variable power output 
settings, and a number of electrical contact 
connectors, jump bugs alow options for 
connecting to individual components of a 
starship. Once a technician has disconnected 
the power leads from the ship’s inactive power 
drive, she can connect the jump bug to the 
leads, set the jump bug’s power settings, and 
reactivate the component. Usually these are 
small systems including a ship’s computer, door 
servos, a turbolift, or other similar small system. 
Being small-output units, jump bugs are unable 
to power up a ship’s main drive, artificial gravity, 
shields, or major weapon systems. 


E Jump Bug 
Model: Orfa Toolco V3-28 Jump Bug 
Type: Mobile power unit 
Skill: Appropriate related repair roll. 
Cost: 225 


m | | E 
|| 2. 


Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Once the character has made 
an Easy repair roll, the jump bug will power a 
starship component or small system for up to 
four hours. The jump bug can be easily 
disconnected and used on other ship systems 
at will, though it may only power one system 
at a time. 


Hydraulic Door Pry 

While cutting lasers and plasma welders are 
frequent choices for cutting through a ship’s 
blast doors, they are not always the most 
pragmatic choice. Most blast doors are designed 
with energy resistance in mind, and if a door 
maintains a magnetic seal, cutting through is 
nearly impossible. On such occasions, brute 
force is a simple and practical, but an altogether 
time consuming solution. Hydraulic door levers 
are portable pieces of heavy equipment 
designed with two clamp-like diamagnetic 
wedges. Once the thin wedges are fitted into any 
crevice in the blast door, the diamagnetic 
wedges begin to disrupt the magnetic seal while 
the hydraulic pressures pry sections of the door 
apart. 


Hl Door Pry 
Model: Startford Industries MGS-171 Door 


Pries 

Type: hydraulic door pry 

Cost: 750 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Applies 1D of physical strength 
to pry open starship door crevices. For every 5 
minutes the pry is operational, the pry adds an 
additional +1D up to a maximum of 8D. 


Laser Power-Torch 

Laser torches and plasma cutters are 
standard tools across the galaxy, varying in price 
and effectiveness. Most are heavy and 
cumbersome, though smaller lower yield units 
are found in machine shops across the galaxy. 
Salvagers most often use power-torches for 
cutting through doorways, walls, and decks. 
Though the beam is relatively short, and the 
power cell too bulky to be carried into combat, 


21 


power-torches can be used as an impromptu 
weapon. 


fl Laser Power-Torch 
Model: Borallis Metalworking & Materials CT7- 
9-Alpha 
Type: Laser cutting torch 
Skill: Various Technical skills 
Cost: 310 
Availability: 2 
Damage: 5D 
Game Notes: If trying to use a bulky power- 
torch as an impromptu weapon, players incur 
a -1D to their Technical roll to hit the target. 


Exothermic Gel 

Burning gels operate on a highly complex set 
of chemical reactions initiated by an electrical 
discharge ignition. The effect is a dramatic 
exothermic reaction capable of melting through 
nearly any material in use in the galaxy. 
Exothermic gels have become known as “hull 
bumers” by salvagers and rescue crews in need 
of penetrating starship hulls and extemal 
hatches for two reasons. First, their high 
temperatures are capable of cutting into almost 
any unshielded ship. Second, the chemical 
reactions require no oxygen, and so the gels are 
able to do their job in the vacuum of space. The 
gels are ineffective on ships with active shields, 
as energy shields disrupt the necessary 
exothermic reactions. 


E Exothermic Gel 
Model: Gatrellis “Hullmelt” Burn Gel 
Type: Hull-breeching incendiary gel 
Skill: Demolitions 
Cost: 150 
Availability: 2, R 
Game notes: With a successful Moderate 
demolitions roll, it takes at least ten minutes to 
apply the two-part compound to the desired 
surface and attach the electrodes from the 
ignition mechanism. Once the character uses 
the ignition switch, the compound is activated 
and begins its thermal reaction. The 
compound does not require atmosphere to 
activate, and burns even in the vacuum of 
space. The activated compound delivers 7D 
starfighter scale damage against any 


m | E 
Å—RE 


unshielded hatch, door, or hull’s die code. If 
the damage roll is successful, the reaction 
creates a breech. 


Salvage Suit 

Though many salvagers make do with 
standard vacuum suits, there are some who look 
for just a bit more edge in making targeted 
collection runs. A salvage suit adds a bit more 
protection as well as a bit more comfort with 
onboard heating and a rebreather atmosphere 
scrubber. Further industrial tools are frequently 
added to these suits to help zero gravity workers 
get their jobs done. 


E] Salvage Suit 
Model: Industrial Space Suit 
Type: Deep space suit 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 1,800 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: 
Atmosphere: Rebreather oxygen scrubbing 
and onboard heating units provide for 10 
hours of atmosphere. 
Armor protection: Adds +1D to all Strength 
rolls to resist physical and energy damage. 
Short range scanner/comm package: Adds 
+1D to sensors and communications rolls. 
Repulsors: Provide a move of 10 meters in 
zero gravity. Skill: repulsorlift operation 
Magna grappler: Includes magnetic grappler 
with 20 meters of synth rope 
Laser cutting tool: 4D damage (Skill: relevant 
Technical skills) 


Wreck Suit 

Extraordinary circumstances call for training 
and equipment far outside the common spacer 
in a vacuum suit, and wreck suits are designed 
with the extraordinary in mind. Though droids 
are often relegated to the most dangerous 
extravehicular evaluations and repairs, some 
captains and work crews place a high value on 
sentient judgment and would rather have a 
capable being than any machine making the 
calls. When dealing with unstable starship 
wrecks, assessing catastrophic capital ship hull 
damage, risky rescue operations, or recovery 
missions wreck suits rise to the occasion. When 


22 


dealing with failing starship systems and 
flickering gravity plates, or shifting masses of 
wreckage the right suit can mean the difference 
between success and failure, and even life and 
death. With its wide array of equipment options, 
some salvage captains make good use out of 
wreck suits. Often used in selective salvage, 
rather than dismantling entire starships, the 
wreck suits allow a scavenger to find his way 
into an unstable ship, locate special items of 
value, and make his way back out. 


WEVA Wreck Suit 
Model: Scavani Engineering Recovery Series 
VI Power Suit 
Type: Deep space power suit 
Skill: Powersuit operation: wreck suit 
Crew: 1 
Cover: Full 
Cost: 2,700 
Game Notes: 
Atmosphere: Rebreather oxygen scrubbing 
and onboard heating units provide for 16 
hours of atmosphere. 
Armor protection: +3D physical and +1D 
energy, -1D to Dexterity. 
Short range scanner/comm package: Adds 
+2D to sensors and communications rolls. 
Jump jets: Jets have fuel for 5 bursts with a 
speed of Space 1 and 1D maneuverability 
Magna grappler: Includes magnetic grappler 
with 20 meters of synth rope 
Magnetic boots: Electromagnetic boots can be 
activated to adhere to most metallic surfaces. 
Plasma cutting torch: cuts through most 
surfaces given enough time. For every 1D a 
surface has in body strength, it takes the 
plasma cutter 1D rounds to cut a 2 meter 
diameter hole in the surface. For example, a 
blast door with a rating of 5D strength, will 


take 5D rounds to penetrate. Maximum 
damage : 7D. 

Grasping arm: Provides a standard 7D lifting 
skill. 


Poly-tool arm: Set of retractable tools adds 
+1D to relevant spacecraft repair rolls. 


Droids 


A number of deep-space salvagers have well 
earned the reputation of being loaners. Some 
have no desire to give anyone else a cut of the 


en 
| || 


profits, or others just want their space. One way 
or the other, a ship cannot run itself, and so most 
of the loners have at least a droid or two. 
Especially because salvage jobs need more than 
just one set of hands. Most only own a pair of 
labor droids, a load lifter, or an astromech. But a 
few companies cater to salvagers, and made 
droids just for deep-space recovery. 


Retriever Droid 

The basic model retriever droid is small and 
simple, but adept at performing its limited range 
of tasks. Specifically programmed for release in 
larger debris fields, it will locate materials of size 
and composition within the parameters 
designated by its master. Given the relatively 
small size of the droid, it is adept at working its 
way through smaller crevices in breeched hulls, 
or bringing back smaller materials. Though 
when released en masse, they can quickly clear 
debris fields of smaller flotsam, their small size 
and limited thrust prevents them from acquiring 
larger sections of recyclable materials. 


| Retriever Droid 
Type: Srori-nam G2 Retriever Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Search 4D 
STRENGTH 1D+2 
Lifting 3D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Space transport repair 3D, 
capital ship repair 3D 
Equipped With: 
e Two manipulator arms 
e Zero-gravity maneuvering jets 
e Repulsorlift propulsion 
e internal comlink 
e 4 retractable wheels 
Move: 13 (flying) 5 (wheeled) 
Size: 0.6 meters tall 
Cost: 2,100 
Availability: 1 
Personality Matrix: None 


23 


Sorter Droid 

Though similar to menial labor droids founds 
throughout the galaxy, sorter droids come with a 
distinct advantage to other models. Passive 
salvage brings in vast amounts of materials. 
Some of the debris is actually functional or 
repairable. Other items are fit for no more than 
recycling. Sorter droids are able to make 
assessments of the condition of the materials 
and sort them based on their relative value. Able 
to stand the tedium of long shifts with little 
recharge time, sorter droids are found in deep- 
space passive salvage vessels throughout the 
galaxy. They become particularly attractive to 
captains who see no need to environmentally 
seal their sorting bays. 


| Sorter Droid 
Type: Kovtharian Industries Industrial Sorter 
Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Value 4D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D-+ 1 
Search 3D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Lifting 4D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Equipped With: 
¢ Humanoid frame (two arms, legs, head) 
e Basic vocabulator 
e Two auditory receptors 
¢ Two photoreceptors 
Move: 7 
Size: 1.4 meters 
Cost: 1,900 
Availability: 2 
Personality Matrix: Simple 


Survey Scanbot 

Though some salvagers prefer the thrill and 
danger of hazarding their way into a derelict or 
half-destroyed starship in hopes of finding some 
hidden gem of treasure, others prefer to do the 
initial evaluation from the safety of their 
starships. The Survey Scanbot is a simplified, 
civilian version of a probe droid. The scanbot’s 
features are relatively modest compared to their 
military or espionage counterparts. Nonetheless, 


OE 
0 || 2. 


they are well suited to maneuvering into small 
areas while recording and transmitting their 
findings. Further, a modest personality matrix 
allows for easy communication and also some 
interpretation of data with real-time 
communication. Some search and rescue crews 
have adapted some _ scanbot models by 
equipping them with life form sensor packages 
to assist in the rescue of trapped beings involved 
in starship accidents. 


| Survey Scanbot 
Type: Kalvani Systems Model L33 Survey 
Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Starship deckplans 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Search: 5D 
STRENGTH 1D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Equipped With: 
e Hardened shell armor +1D to resist physical 
damage 
e Repulsorlift propulsion 
e Short range sensor package +1D to search 
in the ultraviolet and infrared spectrums as 
well as electromagnetic fields 
e Auditory sensors 
* One visual sensor 
e Broadband transmitter/receiver 
e Holorecorder with simultaneous 
holotransmission 
Move: 17 
Size: 0.3 meters 
Cost: 4,550 
Availability: 3 
Personality Matrix: Elementary 


Zero-G Scavenger Droid 

Understanding the limitations of the retriever 
droids, Srori-nam took their basic design and 
began concepts for an advanced model capable 
of providing greater personal assistance to 
salvage crews. The result was the Zero-G 
Scavenger Droid. A much larger and robust 
model with more advanced features, the 
Scavenger became a valuable asset to salvage 
captains. The Scavenger was intelligent enough 


24 


to coordinate with industrial and independent 
salvage crews, and had sufficient thrust to bring 
desired components aboard the ship. This, 
among its other features made the Scavenger a 
popular model for targeted salvage missions. 
Should the Scavenger find itself on board a ship 
with active gravity plates, its retractable wheels 
still allowed it to remain a functional unit. 


I Zero-G Scavenger Droid 
Type: Srori-nam C98 Scavenger Droid 
DEXTERITY 2D +2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Value 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Search 5D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Lifting 5D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Space transport repair 3D, capital ship repair 
3D 
Equipped With: 
e Two manipulator arms 
* Retractable electromagnetic grappling units 
* Fusion cutter (6D damage) 
e Zero-gravity maneuvering jets 
e Repulsorlift propulsion 
e Retractable wheeled locomotion 
e Basic vocabulator 
¢ Short range transmitter/receiver 
Move: 18 flying, 5 wheeled 
Size: 1.2 meters tall 
Cost: 3,100 
Availability: 1 
Personality Matrix: Simple 


Starship Equipment and 
Upgrades 


Few ship designers cater specifically to 
scavengers. Rather than start with an off-the-line 
model, most salvage captains mod a light or 
medium freighter. Most of us do it piecemeal 
over time. After a good find, the crew will put 
some credits into their ship to let them expand 
the scope of their operations. 


ee 
| || 


Salvage Grade Tractor Beams 

Many salvage ship captains have found it 
advantageous to use small-scale tractor beams 
to aid in their collecting process. Relatively weak 
in comparison to their larger, military-grade 
counterparts, these tractor beams are not 
designed to lock on to high velocity spacecraft 
and resist the propulsion of their engines. Rather, 
they can easily manipulate flotsam and space 
debris as they idly drift on their paths and guide 
them into a collection bay. 


| Salvage Tractor Beam 
Model: Starfire Inc. FFJ-1 Grappler 
Type: Civilian issue salvage grade tractor 
beam 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 7,000 
Weight: 7 metric tons 
Availability: 1 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1-3/10/20 
Damage: 1D 


Grav-Scoops 
Though some salvagers prefer to hand pick 
the pieces they bring on board, others prefer a 
catch-all system where any piece of debris is 
drawn into their collector, and the value of the 
items is sorted out later. Gravitational scoops are 
a favored method by those captains who utilize 
the mass collection method. Grav-scoops 
operate on similar methods as grav plates 
installed in the decks of almost any standard 
starship in the galaxy. Being little more than 
large apertures lined on all sides with rows of 
narrow but strong grav plates, the gravitational 
scoops draw in space debris, and then fire in 
series to pass them through to a collection area. 
This method allows the captain to make slow 
passes through fields of small debris making 

sizable collections on each pass. 


25 


| Grav-Scoop 
Model: Bostic Industries Charybdis 6 Grav- 
scoop 
Type: passive salvage collection system 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 5,100 
Weight: 1 metric ton 
Availability: 2 
Space Range: 1 
Game Notes: Grav-scoops have relatively 
large apertures situated on the exterior of the 
ship which have considerable effects when 
operating the ship in atmosphere. Any ship 
with a grav-scoop has all in-atmosphere 
maneuvers are increased by one difficulty 
level. 


Appendage Collection System 

Some freelance scavengers have taken to 
outfitting their ships with several droid brain 
controlled appendage arms. The droid brain is 
usually located in a central position inside the 
ship as it controls several appendage arms at 
once. Using the ships passive sensors, the droid 
brain is able to detect floating space debris that 
fits the criteria for mass or volume that the 
captain desires. More elaborate units may scan 
for the composition of the debris, discerning 
between ice or rock debris and more valuable 
reclaimable materials such as starship alloys. 
The droid arms deliver the alloys into apertures 
in the hull leading to the cargo bay or collection 
area. 


| Appendage Collection System 
Model: Bostic Industries Scylla Acquisition 
System - Series 3 
Type: Passive salvage collection system 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 4,600 
Availability: 2 
Space Range: 1 
Game Notes: Appendage collection systems 
can be installed on the exterior of a ship near 
the craft’s cargo hold. Using droid controlled 
arms they latch on to all space debris within 
set parameters of volume or mass. The 
appendages then deliver the items into 
specially designed apertures that lead to the 
cargo hold. 


ee 
|| 2. 


Starship Plasma Cutting Torch 

Cutting torches are a staple of targeted or 
active salvage vessels, and found on almost 
every corporate reclamation vessel. These 
torches are often situated at the end of a 
manipulator appendage, helping to compensate 
for such short range. When large sections of a 
starship’s hull are left intact, starship-mounted 
plasma torches are necessary to break the ships 
down to smaller size in order to remove them 
from space lanes. Given enough time, the 
torches are capable of slicing through nearly all 
hull masses and will eventually disassemble 
even the largest bulks of space debris. 


| Plasma Cutting Torch 
Model: Veldirian Industries Plasma Torch 
Type: Starship-mouthed cutting torch 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 4,350 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 0D 
Range: 10 meters 
Damage: 8D 


External Grappling Devices 

Most large-scale collections require 
specialized means of taking the cargo. Larger 
ships with large external cargo bay doors are 
capable of using manipulator arms to grasp hold 
of larger salvage targets and guide them into the 
hold. Manipulator arms are usually rugged and 
sturdy enough to guide many tons of material in 
the weightlessness of space, though they are not 
usually designed for lifting materials in 
atmosphere. Several ship captains have used 
them to assist with repairs to help with rapid 
cargo transfers, though few are willing to test the 
limitations of the devices within standard 
planetary gravity. 


E Light Manipulator Arm 
Model: Siryus Hydrolics FT-479 Loading Arm 
Type: Loading bay manipulator arm 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 2,300 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 


26 


Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 3 meters 
Note: Light manipulator arms easily move, 
manipulate, and guide unsecured objects in 
space. The manipulator arm can easily handle 
loads up to 75 tons. Though the arm has a 
limited reach, the crew may move the object 
one meter per round in any direction within 
the arm’s reach. 


E Medium Manipulator Arm 
Model: Kartog Industries Servo-Lifter 
Type: Loading bay manipulator arm 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 2,850 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 8 meters 
Note: Medium manipulator arms easily move, 
manipulate, and guide unsecured objects in 
space. The medium manipulator can safely 
maneuver loads of up to 150 tons. Though the 
arm has a limited reach, the crew may move 
the object two meters per round in any 
direction within the arm’s reach. 


H Heavy Manipulator Crane 
Model: Siryus Hydrolics MG-9 Loading Arm 
Type: Loading bay manipulator arm 
Scale: Capital 
Cost: 6,500 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 15 meters 
Note: Heavy manipulator arms easily 
manipulate and guide unsecured ob-jects in 
space. The capital scale heavy manipulator is 
capable of safely man-euvering even 
starfighter-scale ships, or other extremely 
large chunks of heavy debris. Though the arm 
has a limited reach, the crew may move the 
object four meters per round in any direction 
within the arm’s reach. 


Cargo and Landing Grips 
Debris comes in all shapes and sizes, and 
while many salvage captains are happy to spend 
their hours using plasma punches to cut the 
pieces of hull and half destroyed ships into 
manageable sections, other captains would 
much rather take the targets in their totality to 


ee 
|| 2. 


major reclamation centers. Cargo claws are 
specifically designed for latching on to 
starfighter-scale pieces of debris and allowing 
the salvage ship to take them to their intended 
destination. Heavy claws allow the transport of 
much larger targets. 

In general utility, cargo claws allow a 
Sstarfighter-scale ship to land and attach to 
almost any surface in zero gravity, regardless of 
the ship’s relative orientation. Starfighter-scale 
ships with cargo grips may latch on to smaller 
starships, take them through hyperspace as well 
as maneuver and move with only modest 
encumbrance. Many times such grips are used 
so that two ships may dock together and transfer 
passengers in space. Capital ships may be 
equipped with starfighter-scale cargo grips for 
makeshift starfighter launches, and they do so 
without any loss of starship maneuverability. 
Capital scale cargo clamps allow bulk and 
medium freighters to transport large cargo 
containers or sections of capital ship hull 
material with only modest loss of performance. 


| Landing Claw 
Model: Surrilian Engineering Landing Claw 
Type: Starship docking/landing device 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 800 
Weight: 2 metric tons 
Game Notes: Any ship using a cargo grip takes 
a -1D to maneuverability. If the ship takes 
damage of Heavily Damaged or worse, the 
Cargo Grip will lose its hold and all ships or 
materials will be shaken loose. 


| Cargo Grip 
Model: SsanduSan Heavy Docking Grip 
Type: Starship docking device 
Scale: Capital 
Cost: 2,000 
Weight: 25 metric tons 
Game Notes: Any capital ship using the cargo 
clamp to transport a capital-scale section of 
debris takes a -1D to maneuverability. If the 
ship takes damage of Heavily Damaged or 
worse, docking clamps lose their hold and all 
ships are shaken loose. 


27 


External Bay Doors 

When performing en masse collections, or 
reclaiming large materials, it is almost 
impossible to transport the items through a 
normal air-lock. Though this is feasible when 
doing small-scale targeted collections, it is far 
too slow and cumbersome on most standard 
ships. Thus many cargo vessels have been 
retrofitted with large bay doors. These doors 
span nearly the entire cargo area, providing as 
much access as possible to large space-bom 
objects. Making such retrofitting is terribly 
expensive, and is usually performed only by 
those starship owners who have come into the 
salvaging trade after developing a deep love for 
their starship. As this modification requires 
turning a portion of the ship’s hull into either a 
hinged or retractable door, it requires several 
time-consuming steps. First, all major power 
systems, environmental conduits, and all other 
important systems that may happen to follow 
that section of the hull must be rerouted. Once 
completed, the sections of the hull must be 
carefully cut and either replaced with or outfitted 
to become a surface capable of opening and 
closing. Servos, latches, and seals must be 
carefully put into place and checked, and then 
controls can be connected to the interior of the 
bay and to the cockpit. And finally, additional 
airlocks and environmental seals are put into 
place to isolate the rest of the ship from 
exposure to the vacuum of space. Only more 
expensive versions of the systems allow for ships 
to seal and pressurize the bay. Several 
environmental controls and safety overrides 
must be installed to safely allow the cargo bay to 
become a non-suited being to work while the 
ship is out of atmosphere. 


| Cargo Bay Doors 
Model: Ambelled Industries Bay Modification 
System 
Type: External bay door 
Scale: Starfighter 
Cost: 30% of base ship cost 
Weight: 20 metric tons 
Game Notes: Allows a ship’s cargo area to 
have direct exposure to space. Requires three 


8 |) 


rounds to go from closed to fully open and vis 
versa. 


| Cargo Bay Pressurization System 
Model: Ambelled Industries Bay Sealer 
Type: Cargo bay 
pressurization/depressurization system 
Scale: Starfighter 


Cost: 8,000 
Weight: 2 metric tons 
Game Notes: Allows for environmental 


controls to restore breathable atmosphere to a 
cargo bay. Requires 10 minutes to 
depressurize or pressurize the cargo bay, 
pumping atmosphere in or out of the cargo 
area. 


Hyperspace Tow 

For those rare occasions that a salvager 
cannot repair a vessel, but wishes to remove it 
from a salvage site, she can opt to attach a 
hyperspace tow rig. The tow is little more than 
an external hyperspace docking rigging that 
attaches to the exterior of the towed ship, and 
patches into the astrogation computer of the 
salvagers ship with a simplified slave circuit. It 
allows the salvager to make short trips. 

The average hyperspace tow can attach to 
starfighter scale ships, usually no more than 45 
meters in length. However, some manufacturers 
make extended rigs for an additional cost. 
Attachment requires at least three hours of labor, 
and a Moderate space transport repair or 
starfighter repair roll. 

The cost of the rigging depends on the speed 
of hyperdrive. Since the salvager is simply slaving 
two independent hyperdrives together, it is vital 
that the salvager purchases a hyperdrive rig with 
the same hyperdrive multiplier as his main 
vessel. 


Hyperspace Tow 


Multiplier 
xl 


x2 
x3 
x4 
xd 


28 


Starships 


There are starships of nearly every make and 
model at any junker’s trading post. Most are 
customized freighters, but one can find stock 
salvage vessels as well. 

Below are a variety of ships representative of 
scavenger vessels. 


Star Skimmer 

The Star Skimmer is a popularized brand 
name that asteroid miners and Stardock workers 
use to refer to a variety of makes and models of 
short range space-capable vehicles. Based on 
the design of a heavy-duty swoop or speeder 
bike, these open-air space-capable tugs have a 
low top-speed and minimal range. However, 
they prove to be a valuable resource for those 
who need the fine-tuned controls that the small 
crafts provide. The small stature of the craft 
combined with the need for the full protection of 
an environmental suit to ride one in open space 
have elicited considerable criticism. Often, 
spacers have classified them as vehicles and 
would never consider them as starships in their 
own right, and even the Correllean Engineering 
has cataloged their model as a “space utility 
vehicle.” The Star Skimmers have a complete 
lack of aerodynamics and are designed 
exclusively for zero-gravity, which make them 
unacceptable choices for any atmospheric work. 
Despite their shortcomings, Star Skimmers are in 
wide use where the precision work of a small 
craft is needed over the functions larger tugs 
provide. There are several models in use 
throughout asteroid mining projects, spacedock 
and repair facilities, and on some salvage ships. 
Even though Star Skimmers have relatively low 
speeds, they are known for providing the 
necessary torque for heavy lifting jobs. 


E Star Skimmer 
Craft: Corellian Engineering GG-135 Star 
Skimmer 
Type: Space utility tug 
Scale: Speeder 


m |, E 
| || 2. 


Length: 3.1 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift Operations: Star Skimmer 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 0 
Cargo Capacity: None 
Cover: 1/4 
Consumables: None 
Cost: 7,620 (new), 3,821 (used) 
Maneuverability: 2D 
Space: 1 
Body: 1D 
Atmosphere: N/A 
Body Strength: 4D 
Starship Equipment: 
1 Fine Manipulator Arm 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 1.5 meters 
Note: Manipulator arms easily move and 
guide unsecured objects in space. 
Though the arm has a limited reach, the 
crew may move the object two meters 
per round in any direction within the 
arm’s reach. 


Cargo Tug 

Any pilot who has spent his life near space 
docks is no stranger to the cargo tug. Simple, 
inelegant, and made for pure utility, these 
working vessels populate many cargo transfer 
stations, space docks, and loading points. Pilots 
spend a full shift laboring in the cramped 
conditions of a simple one-man tug. Not built for 
comfort, these small crafts have a single purpose 
in mind, moving space born objects from one 
location to another. By using standard tractor 
beam technology, they can lock on to relatively 
large objects and deliver them to their 
destination. Though not fast, their engines are 
designed to deliver consistent performance 
despite moving a considerable load. 


| Cargo Tug 
Craft: Slevurian Model 431 Hauler Tug 
Type: Spacetug 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 7 meters 
Skill: Space Transports: Slevurian Cargo Tug 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 0 


29 


Cargo Capacity: None 
Consumables: | day 
Cost: 18,500 
Maneuverability: 0D 
Space: 2 
Atmosphere: N/A 
Hull: 1D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 5/+1 
Scan: 10/1D 
Search: 15/1D+1 
Focus: 1/2D 
Starship Equipment: 
1 Tractor Beam Projector 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1-5 
Damage: 3D 


Salvage Tug 

Heavy salvage jobs require specialized tools 
for the trade. When derelict bulk freighters 
cannot be repaired or towed into dock for a 
complete overhaul, or when capital ships meet 
catastrophic ends, they must be dismantled and 
disposed of. Usually based from another ship or 
space dock, a salvage crew is often dispatched 
in a salvage tug. Slightly roomier than the 
average space tug, the salvage tugs come 
equipped with fine manipulator arms, and 
plasma cutting torches. The torches are similar, 
but less powerful than their starship-based 
counterparts used for breeching hulls in military 
or pirate boarding operations. They are designed 
to have close contact with the target vessel’s 
hull, and slice through the wreckage with a 
powerful short-range beam. Once separated 
from the larger portion, the salvage tug uses its 
tractor beam projectors to haul the pieces to a 
collection ship or cargo container. 


i Salvage Tug 
Craft: Legurvio Industries Scavanger Tug 
Type: Spacetug 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 10 meters 
Skill: Space Transports: Scavenger Tug 
Crew: 1 (2 can coordinate) 
Passengers: 0 
Cargo Capacity: None 


ee 
|) 


Consumables: 2 days 
Cost: 21,000 
Maneuverability: 0D+2 
Space: 3 
Atmosphere: N/A 
Hull: 1D+1 
Sensors: 
Passive: 5/+1 
Scan: 15/1D 
Search: 20/1D+1 
Focus: 2/2D 
Starship Equipment: 
1 Tractor Beam Projector 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1-3/5/10 
Damage: 3D 
1 Plasma Cutting Torch 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 0D 
Range: 10 meters 
Damage: 8D 
1 Medium Manipulator Arm 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 4 meters 
Note: Manipulator arms easily move and 
guide unsecured objects in space. 
Though the arm has a limited reach, the 
crew may move the object two meters 
per round in any direction within the 
arm’s reach. 


Surronian L19-c Heavy Salvage Freighter 

The Surronian L19 is a well recognized 
model of heavy freighter in the galaxy, though 
the specialized L19-c was a niche production 
model meant to serve smaller independent 
salvage crews. The design was well suited for 
deep space passive collection, as well as being 
versatile enough to cover additional functions as 
well. The L19-c makes some sacrifices over the 
original L-19 to accommodate the needs of a 
salvage crew. Passenger space is reduced to 
make room for additional consumables and 
salvage collection needs. Some of the hull 
strength is sacrificed to keep the production 
costs within an affordable consumer range. 
However, the main selling point is the L19-c’s 


30 


dual-cargo bays. To the port was a rather 
unimpressive run-of-the-mill freighter 50 metric 
ton cargo bay complete with loading ramp. To 
starboard was a 150-ton pressurized salvage bay. 
A freighter captain and copilot could handle the 
ship easily, drifting through debris fields 
collecting what they could via a grav scoop, 
while the crew or onboard droids sorted the 
material. However, the bay could also be 
depressurized for large-scale active collection. In 
the event that the captain was unwilling to risk 
opening the doors with cargo in the hold, a 
limited amount could be moved port for storage. 
Further, the double hold system allowed salvage 
crews to engage in limited cargo trading if the 
opportunity presented itself without having to 
remove a collection hold from active service. 


| Heavy Salvage Freighter 
Craft: Surronian L19-c Heavy Salvage 
Freighter 
Type: Heavy salvage freighter 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 58 meters 
Skill: Space transports: Surronian L19 freighter 
Crew: 2 
Crew Skill: Varies widely 
Passengers: 7 
Cargo Capacity: 200 metric tons (50 Port 150 
Starboard) 
Consumables: 3 months 
Cost: 81,000 (new), 37,000 (used) 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x3 
Hyperdrive Backup: x16 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Maneuverability: 1D+1 
Space: 5 
Atmosphere: 280; 800 kmh 
Hull: 6D 
Shields: 1D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 30/1D 
Scan: 80/2D 
Search: 120/3D 
Focus: 4/4D 
Weapons: 
1 Double Heavy Laser Cannon 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D+2 
Space Range: 1-3/12/25 


m | | 
|| 2. 


Atmosphere Range: 100-300/1.2/2.5 km 
Damage: 4D 
Starship Equipment: 

Grav Scoop 

Starboard Bay Doors 

1 Tractor Beam Projector 

Fire Arc: left 

Skill: starship gunnery 

Space Range: 1-5/15/30 

Damage: 4D 


Sranso Medium Scavenger 

The Sranso was never considered an 
attractive ship, but its function is nearly 
uncontested. A medium freighter designed for 
passive collection featuring three 50 ton cargo 
bays (one port, one starboard and one aft), the 
vessel has been known to venture into deep 
space for months, patrolling for unreported 
starship mishaps only to return with cargo bays 
filled with reclaimable materials. However, the 
ship is not a favorite among the most fiercely 
independent captains, given the reliance on a 
small crew. Nonetheless, for those willing to split 
the meager profits of a scavenger’s life, the 
Sranso has earned its place. 


i Medium Salvage Freighter 
Craft: Vanrium Inc. Sranso Mark II Medium Scavenger 
Type: Medium Salvage Vessel 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 38 meters 
Skill: Space transports: Sranso Medium Scavenger 
Crew: 3 
Passengers: 8 
Cargo Capacity: 150 metric tons 
Consumables: 6 months 
Cost: 165,000 (used) 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Hyperdrive Backup: x14 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Space: 5 
Atmosphere: 313; 900 kmh 
Hull: 4D 
Shields: 1D 
Sensors: 

Passive: 30/1D 

Scan: 65/2D 

Search: 110/3D 

Focus: 4/4D 


31 


Weapons: 
1 Blaster Cannon 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1-5/10/17 
Atmosphere Range: 100-500/1/1.7 km 
Damage: 4D 
Starship Equipment: 
Cargo Clamp 
2 Grav Scoops (1 Port, 1 Starboard) 
Bay Doors (on aft bay only) 
2 Medium Grappler Arms (aft) 
Carried Craft: 1 Cargo Tug 


Modified YT-1300 

Largely on account of the ease to 
modifications, the Corellian Industries YT-1300 is 
one of the more popular light freighters in the 
galaxy. However, given their easy modifications, 
there are hardly any examples of stock models 
remaining. Because of their wide reputation and 
how easily independent starship captains take to 
them, it is hardly surprising that some salvagers 
have taken to suiting a few models to their 
specifications. 


I Modified yT-1300 

Craft: Modified Corellian Engineering Corp. 
YT-1300 Transport 
Type: Modified light freighter 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 27 meters 
Skill: Space transports: YT-1300 
Crew: 1 (2 can coordinate), gunners: 1 
Passengers: 6 
Cargo Capacity: 85 metric tons 
Consumables: 2 months 
Cost: 32,000 (used) 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Hyperdrive Backup: x12 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Space: 4 
Atmosphere: 480; 800 kmh 
Hull: 4D 
Sensors: 

Passive: 15/0D 

Scan: 30/1D 

Search: 50/2D 

Focus: 5/3D 
Weapons: 
1 Heavy Double Laser Cannon 


m | 
| || 


Fire Arc: Turret 

Crew: 1 

Skill: Starship gunnery 

Fire Control: 2D 

Space Range: 1-3/12/25 

Atmosphere Range: 

100-300/1.2/2.5 km 

Damage: 4D 
Starship Equipment: 
Appendage Collection System 
Landing Claw 
Double-Wide Airlock: A double-wide airlock 
is a custom modification allowing the crew to 
transport larger goods without compromising 
the atmosphere inside the cargo area by 
opening the cargo lifts. 
Plasma Cutting Torch 

Fire Arc: Front 

Skill: Starship gunnery 

Fire Control: 0D 

Range: 10 meters 

Damage: 8D 


Mark-4 Bulk Salvage Ship 

The Mark series freighter has served cargo 
captains well for decades. With a solid 
reputation for durability and reliable 
performance it was hardly surprising that a 
confederation of incorporated salvage 
companies sent requests to Corellian 
Engineering to produce a vessel designed for 
their line of work. Since then, the Mark-4 Bulk 
Salvage Ship has been a corporate favorite. With 
extensive cargo bays and powerful cutting tools, 
these ships and their crews can take a capital- 
sized navigational hazard and clear a space lane 
in no time. Though generally too large to be 
operated by independent salvagers, the Mark-4 
can be found in or near almost every civilized 
system. Even when large-scale collisions are 
unlikely, corporate entities often take smaller 
disabled crafts in tow, ensuring safe space lanes. 


| Mark-4 Bulk Salvage Vessel 
Craft: Corellian Engineering Corp. Mark-4 
Salvage Ship 
Type: Bulk Salvage Ship 
Scale: Capital 
Length: 115 meters 
Skill: Space transports: Mark-4 Bulk Salvage 
Ship 


32 


—————— 


Crew: 9, skeleton: 4/+5 
Crew Skill: Varies widely 
Passengers: 4 
Cargo Capacity: 500,000 metric tons 
Consumables: 2 months 
Cost: 1.1 million (new), 650,000 (used) 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x3 
Hyperdrive Backup: x20 
Nav Computer: Limited to 4 jumps 
Space: 4 
Atmosphere: 225; 650 kmh 
Hull: 2D 
Shields: 1D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 20/0D 
Scan: 30/1D 
Search: 40/1D+2 
Focus: 1/2D 
Starship Equipment: 
4 Tractor Beam Projectors (fire separately) 
Fire Arc: 2 left, 2 right 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Space Range: 1-5/15/30 
Damage: 4D 
2 Heavy Manipulator Cranes 
Fire Arc: 1 left, 1 right 
Skill: capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 10 meters 
Note: Heavy manipulator arms easily move, 
manipulate, and guide unsecured objects in 
space. Though the arm has a limited reach, 
the crew may move the object four meters 
per round in any direction within the arm’s 
reach. 
Carried craft: 4 Salvage Tugs 


33 


= TAR. WARS 


THE SCAVENGER’S HANDBOOK 


A GUIDE TO SALVAGE IN THE GALAXY 


“One being’s trash is another being’s treasure.” 


The life of a salvager is full of dangers, toils and snares. 
A scavenger is ever dodging traps set by claim jumpers 
and rival scavengers and evading the looming threat 
of the ever-watchful eye of an oppressive Empire. The 
unwary spacer is sure to have a short career. 


Prepare to retrieve hidden treasure within derelict liner, 
or steal away with illicit finds from a drifting warship. 
The Scavenger’s Handbook gives players and GMs the 
tools of the trade From navigating Imperial regulation 
to ships and equipment, you are ready to find your 
fortune in the distant reaches of the galaxy. 


Inspired by 


WUE 


Available free. $0.00 


| ranc ll com 


wNGAMES 


