GALAXY GUIDE 7 


MOS EISLEY 


by Martin Wixted 


Development and Editing: Bill Smith 
Graphics: John Paul Lona * Cover Art: Lucasfilm Ltd. 


Published by 


ts 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40069 


Im. Ltd. (LFL). Al Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End 


Introduction 


I Introduction 


“Mos Eisley Spaceport ... you will never find a 
more wretched hive of scum and villainy. 


Two figures saunter with a measured gait down 
anarrow, dusty alley: one is a Human, the other 
a Droid. The sandstone walls protect them from 
the terrible brightness of the twin suns but not 
the oppressive heat. A small cowled figure de- 
taches herself from a doorway and approaches 
them, 

There is some discussion as the woman shows 
themanapackage concealed beneath hershabby 
cloak. The man fingers the bag of spice the woman 
offers, and then hands it to the Droid for exami- 
nation with a sensor probe. The man is thumbing 
a money pouch around his waist when the Droid 
makes a disparaging comment. 

The woman points a threatening finger at the 
Droid, and then at the man. The man lets go of 
both the spice and his money and shoves her. 
She replies with a blur of motion — a blaster 
pistol is suddenly in her hand and there are two 
flashes of green blaster fire. The man drops, then 
the Droid. She quickly finds the coin pouch and 
covers the bodies with debris. She strolls away 
unhurriedly. 

The woman walks down the alley with confi- 
dene a rich haul. And no one will ask 
questions about what has happened. She knows 
that she has mastered the ways of Mos Eisley in 
a way that few others will. Now, it is time for a 
brief celebration. 

She fails to notice the three ruffians watching 
from one of the rooftops. They move in and drop 
a lasso. It lands expertly around her neck —they 
have done this before. She is soon forced to part 
with her ill-gotten gains and her last breath. The 
ruffians hurry away. 

Meanwhile, a maintenance Droid on a break 
from work saunters past the two bodies. It stops 
upon hearing the damaged Droid’s plea for help 
and bends over the helpless Droid, rummaging 
around. It grabs a pair of the Droid’s servomo- 
tors, ripping them from the damaged Droid’s 
It then continues down the alley. 


ARST 


Beware! 


Welcome to Mos Eisley! Galaxy Guide 7: Mos 
Eisley presents an in-depth look at this famous 
pirate spaceport. Known in many quarters as the 
home base of the infamous crime lord Jabba the 
Hutt, Mos Eisley is a dark and dangerous city with 
profits to be made and lives to be lost. 

This traveler's guide offers you a glimpse into 
the people and places of the notorious space- 
port, with illustrations, diagrams, maps and game 
statistics for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition. 

This book takes you to the back streets and 
docking bays of a pirate city famous for its dan- 
gers and opportunities. Characters come to life 
and the famous Mos Eisley Cantina and many 
other fantastic locations are now ready for your 
own Star Wars adventures. 
book contains detailed information on 
the city, but it is suggested that the gamemaster 
have Tatooine Manhunt for additional informa- 
tion, as well as a beautiful full-color map of the 
interior of the city. If gamemasters are looking for 
additional interesting characters to populate Mos 
Eisley, refer to Galaxy Guide 1; A New Hope and 
Galaxy Guide 5: Return of the Jedi. 

Naturally, this guidebook is useful for running 
adventures in and about Mos Eisley. This book 
allows the characters to wander freely in this 
interesting location, while giving the gamemaster 
information on many new locations, breathing 
life into this city. 

Additionally, most of the information in this 
book can easily be transported to other rough- 
and-tumble trade cities. For example, the person- 
alities inhabiting the Mos Eisley cantina can be 
transported to another spacer bar halfway across 
the galaxy. Anywhere a sizable collection of be- 
ings congregate, aided by an ever-present under- 
world and a policy of free trade, you can find a 
place suitable for mayhem. Mos Eisley is but one 
of many such areas in the galaxy. 

After skimming through this book, the poten- 


Mos Eisley 


TA... .ntroduction 
Re 


"WA! 


tial for adventure should be obvious. The texture 
of Mos Eisley is rundown and derelict. There are 
transients in alleys and dark forms flittering to 
and fro down dark passageways. All five senses 
are assaulted, 

The winding stairs, dark alleys, crumbling 
buildings and random mine shafts are great for 
running battles. A landspeeder chase, conversely, 
is likely to end quickly because skewed alleys 
narrow suddenly or turn abruptly. 

A lack of police protection makes the often- 
messy consequences of a firefight nonexistent. 
This attitude is reflected in most of the inhabit- 
ants. As long as you do not damage their prop- 
erty or injure them, they are not likely to take 
much notice. 

Characters can also get pulled into corporate 
espionage adventures — the key is to grab what 
is needed before the shooting starts. Characters 
can become involved in the massive organiza- 
tion of Jabba the Hutt, or simply run into the 
countless small-time hoods who inhabit the back 
alleys of the city. 

The factory areas to the north of the city offer 
a slight change of scenery — the piping and 
caverns of the oil rig-like buildings and aban- 
doned mining tunnels add suspense. Remember 
when the Millennium Falcon was going through 
the tunnel inside the second Death Star? The 
pipes and corridors created by the superstruc- 
ture of the battle station was a terrific back- 
ground for a high-speed chase, Keep the Death 
Star in mind when your smugglers careen through 
abandoned oil refinery platforms and closed Droid 
construction plants, The caverns are great for 

“bug hunts” or “hide and shoot" 
cavernous chambers and overhead spars create 
ominous shadows behind which might be lurking 
„anything. 
In short, Mos zi 


great setting for many 
s all with danger, excite- 
ipentrand adventure unique to the Star Wars 
universe, 


Mos Eisley 


Slang of the Sands 


Mos Eisley has its own terminology, just like any other 
city across the galaxy. Some of the more choice bits which 
visitors may stumble over are listed below. 


Bantha Fodder: Worthless or waste. “You won't be 
worth bantha fodder.” 

Binary: As in, "You can be so binary at times.” Meant as 
a criticism, denoting extreme stubborness, or inability to 
compromise on an issue. 

Bloated One: Specifically Jabba the Hutt, but can be 
used as a disparaging reference to any Hutt. 

Buy the Depp: To die, usually violently. Rather recent, 
named for the former Prefect. Probably started in the 
police force. 

Feed the Sarlace: To disappear, never to be seen again; 
to hide from legal authorities. 

Final Jump: To die, usually peacefully. Origin is from 
the jump to lightspeed. 

First Twilight: The time between the first and second 
sunsets. 

Gravel Maggot: (Also “feed like a gravel maggot.") A 
disparaging term for a person who takes advantage of 
others. Named after a native scavenger. 

Grease the Servomotors: To bribe an official. 

Jawa Trader: Anyone who isn't honest, or trades in 
stolen or badly damaged goods. Other comparisons to 
Jawas often involve dishonesty as well. 

Moisture Boy: Young moisture farmers who come to 
Mos Eisley wild-eyed and with no common sense. Refers to 
anyone who doesn't know his or her way around. Warn- 
ing: Using this phrase in farming communities is a good 
way to start a fight. 

Lost in the Wastes: To be totally unprepared for a 
situation. Refers to getting lost in the Jundland Wastes. 

Sand Mine: Something worthless. Something that any- 
one with common sense should know better than to get 
involved with. 

Suns-scorched ball: Tatooine. 

Tatoo: The Imperial Reference for Tatooine's twin suns, 
Tatoo Í and Tatoo ll. 

Tourist: A person unable to get anything done. Refers to 
Governor Tour Aryon's inability to accomplish anything. 
Deliberately confusing to visitors. 


Chapter One: Tatooine: Ru 
VAR SS 


INM Chapter One 


Tatooine 


“It was a vast, shining globe and it cast a light of 
lambent topaz into space — but it was not a sun. 
Thus, the planet had fooled travelers for a long 
time. Not until entering close orbit around it did its 
discoverers realize that this was a world in a binary 
system and not a third sun itself.” 


Like many other frontier planets plotted by 
the Republic Survey Corps during the heyday of 
the Old Republic's expansion, the first planet in 
the tri-planetary system J11.9 looked to be a 
promising source of minerals and other raw m: 
terials for a hungry galaxy. The initial (admi 
tedly cursory) inspection turned up no intelli- 
gent indigenous life forms, and the planet was 
approved for colonization. 

Settlers were plentiful back then. The Repub- 
lic had been growingin leaps and bounds. But the 
Republic was unimaginably huge. Millions of hab- 
itable worlds had been catalogued by the time 
they discovered this little planet —it took time to 
settle them. 

So it was no surprise that almost a thousand 
years passed before the first official Republic 
colony ships dotted the surface of the rugged 
planet. No matter what conditions might be like 
on the new world, the settlers were convinced 
that it was superior to what they had left behind. 


First Contact 


As is now known, there were indeed indig- 
enous life forms. One species was encountered 
soon after the settlers arrived. Although instinc- 
tive cowards, these small beings seemed covet- 
ous of the Republic’s technology. 

Whatever their origin, these intelligent, ro- 
dent-like scavengers avoided direct contact with 
the settlers, and communicated in a language 
indecipherable to the new homesteaders. The 
leader of the new colony, Melnea Arnthout, sug- 
gested letting the enigmas be. There was an 
urgency evident in this request: one of the colony 
ships, the Dowager Queen, had crashed many 
kilometers away while on final approach, deny- 


Tatooine 


Type: Terrestrial 

‘Temperature: Hot 

Atmosphere: Type | (Breathable) 

Hydrosphere: Dry 
ravity: Standard 

Terrain: Desert 

Length of Day: 23 Standard Hours 

Length of Year: 304 Local Days 

Sapient Species: Humans, Jawas(N), Tusken 
Raiders(N) 

Starport: Standard Class 

Population: 80,000 (Estimated. There has 
never been a cen: en on Tatooine.) 

Planet Function: Smuggling, trade, subsis 
tence 

Government: Imperial Governor 

Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: Illegal munitions (smuggled), 
illegal security devices (smuggled), ille- 
gal drugs (smuggled), minerals (salt, 
sand-products) 

Major Imports: Mid-technology, high-tech- 
nology, metals, foodstuffs, chemical 

Points of Interest: Mos Eisley Spaceport, 
Jabba the Hutt's Palace 


System Data 


Region: Outer Rim Territories 
Sector: Arkani 

Moff: Alexander Julstan IV 
Governor: Tour Aryon 
System Name: Tatoo 

Star Name: Tatoo |, Tatoo Il 
Star Type: Yellow Binary 


Orbital Bodies 


Type 
Hot Terrestrial 
Gas Giant 
Gas Giant 


Name 
Tatooine 
Ohann 
Adriana 


Mos Eisley 


TAI 
AR 


ing the remaining colonists extra supplies, leav- 
ingnot even the slimmest margin for error. lt was 
critical to finish getting the water, power, and 
food processors up and running. That first sea- 
son was difficult: sandstorms nearly destroyed 
every building, most of the Banthas disappeared, 
and barely enough food was grown. The settle 
ment, dubbed Bestine by the new homesteaders, 
barely survived that first precarious season. 

‘The disappearance of Melnea's protocol Droid 
after just one season changed everything. The 
settlers were enraged; Melnea knew that she 
must act quickly — not only to assuage her 
group's fear and regain valuable property, but to 
prevent this from happening again. She needed 
to begin negotiations, but she was a settler and 
had little experience as a diplomat. Neverthe- 
less, Melnea decided to make the attempt her- 
self, She succeeded in opening a dialogue with 
the local group of Jawas who had taken her 
Droid. 

With the aid of the Jawas, the Republic settlers 
adopted the Jawa term for the planet (“Tah-doo- 
Een-e"), learned the names of various land fea- 
tures and wildlife (such as the Dewback lizard 
that Melnea aided), and were warned about the 
second form of intelligent life on Tatooine that 
was somehow missed by the Republic Survey 
Corps: the Sand People. 

The colonists expanded, founding Fort Tusken 
in the Jundland Wastes far to the north. Both 
Bestine and Fort Tusken got down to the serious 


— SSeS 


Mos Eisley 


The Sand People 


The origin of the Sand Peopleis yet another area of 
debate. Some scholars believe that it is likely these savage 
warriors evolved from a long-forgotten colonization at- 
tempt by an unknown species; others theorize that they 
simply evolved on the planet. 

They are savage, but fearful, known to attack only when 
they have a clear numeric advantage. They seem to have 
symbiotic relationship with Banthas (it is un- 


a nearly 
known whether the Banthas were stolen from the colo- 
nists, or, as on many other worlds, they were present on 
Tatooine prior to colonization), and also utilize some 
technology, such as blasters stolen from their victim: 


For now, their history and background is a myster 
perhaps someday, scientists will acquire a Tusken Raider 
for examination, but as of yet, none have been captured. 


business of ore mining and learned the delicate 
art of coaxing moisture from the atmosphere for 
growing crops. However, the Sand People made 
their presence known. The first attack on Fort 
Tusken lacked the element of surprise, but still 
resulted in casualties. 

Over the next several seasons the colonists 
sparred with the newly named Tusken Raiders. 
The settlers apparently were deemed to be too 
much trouble to tangle with, and the new resi- 
dents determined that the population of the Sand 
People was too small to pose any real threat. The 


Chapter One: Tatooine 


Chapter One: Tatooinc mn ST Rls 


SR 


Between A Rock And A Hard Place 


Melnea set out into the hot desert at first twilight. 
As she walked into the darkening hills, she hoped she 
could win over the small creatures by approaching 
themaloneand unarmed. Scrambling over asmallhill, 
she paused. Despite the setting suns, the desert was 
still too hot. But she knew it would soon turn bitter 
cold. She checked the parka and tools stored in her 
backpack, swept her long black hair back behind her 
ears, and resumed her hiking. 

Another hour's walk brought her scraped hands 
and knees, but no sign of the elusive residents. For all 
she knew, they were watching her from the dark 
regions of the canyons. Rounding a corner, she sud- 
denly spotted a group of the tiny folk cornered against 
a rock outcropping. Facing them was what looked to 
be a huge reptile. It was whimpering in pain as its 
massive head lolled from side to side. Melnea saw 
immediately that the lizard’s bleeding front paw was 
caught in a fissure of rock. She also saw that the beast 
was well within range of the little creatures, who 
could only huddle in fear. 

She moved swiftly, throwing a rock behind the 
beast. The lizard turned away, toward the distraction, 
and she moved in closer. Grabbing a hydroshovel 
from her backpack, she wedged it in the crevice and 
yanked. There was no change, and the beast was 
turning back to her. She dodged a front paw plunked 
down blindly by the lizard as it attempted to twist free 
its foot. 

Melnea grabbed a piton from her pack and, using 
the hydroshovel as a hammer, chipped away at the 
sides of the fissure. Her hair fell into her face. She 
could feel the warm air blowing from the beast's 
nostrils as she worked. She concentrated on chiseling 
away at the stone. 

Then its head blocked out the final light of the 
second twilight as its jaws dipped toward her. She 
gave the hydroshovel one last pound, the rock splin- 
tered, and the lizard suddenly heaved itself free. It 
snorted once or twice, but made no move to attack. 
Instead, it lay down and licked its injury. 


With that, the brown-clad natives grabbed a heavy 
cable and threw it over the beast's head. They jab- 
bered to each other in that language Melnea and her 
friends had puzzled over for so long, and finally 
beckoned for her to follow. With her heart soaring, 
she walked behind them as they led her to a nearby 
area. It was a small village hidden among the cliffs and 
mountains of the area. A corral of sorts was set up, in 
which two other beasts like this one appeared to be 
grazing for moisture, pushing their noses deep into 
the desert gravel. 

The creatures put the lizard in the stockade and 
disappeared into a cave. Melnea followed. Although it 
was dark out, the utter blackness of the cave required 
some adjustment. She paused, trying to listen. Surely 
these creatures weren't capable of seeing in the dark? 
Suddenly a metal arm grabbed her and a voice ex- 
claimed, “Mistress Melnea! Oh, thank goodness!” 

“Twopio? Is that you?” 

“Thank heavens you've come! These Jawas ... these 
creatures! Oh, my. And not an oil bath anywhere to be 
found!” 

Melnea grinned and relaxed. It was, indeed, 2PO. 
“Twopio, is that their name? Jawas?” 

She could almost sense the Droid straightening 
himself up, in a move as close to a strut as was 
mechanically possible. 

“Yes, Mistress. I have had ample opportunity to be 
immersed into their culture and have managed to 
decipher some of their language, complex as it is. 
They call themselves Jawas. And they, uh, borrowed 
me mostly out of curiosity, not malice.” 

Melnea patted 2PO'sarm. She knew the high-strung 
Droid. When the Jawas first captured him, he prob- 
ably thought he was about to be eaten or broken down 
for parts. She realized he had had terrific motivation 
tolearn the language, for which she was very thankful. 
As she sat down, a stove deeper in the cave glowed to 
life. Melnea brushed the hair away from her face and 
saw Jawas scurry about preparing a meal. “Twopio, 
tell me more.” 


Raiders have since contented themselves with 
attacking a few colonists a year, and since the 
Human population claimed its share of Tuskens, 
peace (of a sort) reigned. 


A Growing World 


With the Sand People situation under control, 
Melnea's full attention could now be turned to 
the mining of local ores. An evaporated sea bed 
east of Bestine, near the wreck of the Dowager 
Queen, was surveyed with promising results, and 
preparations for mining were begun in earnest. 

The planet's terrain, while not “fertile,” could 


still support enough crops to provide sustenance 
for the small population, leading to the establish- 
ment of the small towns of Anchorhead and 
Motesta; Fort Tusken was abandoned due to the 
harsh conditions of the area. 

The Republic miners established a new town 
on the sea bed itself, called Mos Eisley, around 
the site of the Dowager Queen's remains. Not far 
from the boundaries of the new town, a power 
and water distribution plant was built, and the 
town prospered, despite its rough-and-tumble 
nature. 

Nuclear-powered steam vehicles dubbed crawl- 


Mos Eisley 


Chapter One: Tatooine 
eee OO eee 


WN Y 
eu 


ers served as huge, mobile mining platforms. 
With the crawlers easing the excavation and 
smelting chores, Tatooine seemed well on its 
way to economic suc Mos Eisley grew in 
leaps and bounds, serving as the major space- 
port in addition to the center of mining. 

However, the colonists soon learned of another 
great danger of this desert world. It was learned 
that the huge sandstorms completely blinded 
starship sensors. Casting sand many kilometers 
intotheair,withstorm fronts sometimes hundreds 
of kilometers long, a sandstorm could effectively 
cut off all settlements from contact for weeks. Ship 
sensors couldn't tell where the storm ended and 
the planet began, resulting in several crashes in a 
very short period of time. Worse, the storms could 
come up in a matter of minutes, giving almost no 
notice to the towns that lie in the path of these 
engines of destruction. 

Then, another disaster struck. Tatoo Ill, the 
brand new orbital station — designed to transfer 
cargo to and from those transports not capable 
of atmospheric flight — was destroyed. The first 
impulse was to blame the ship Obvious Nirvana, 
which was approaching for refueling at the time 
the disaster occurred. But the survivors who 
escaped in its lifeboat stuck to their story that, as 
the ship approached the station, there was an 
irresistible pull. The flight recorder verified that 
the ship’s engines were in full reverse. There was 
no immediate explanation for the disaster. 

In the final analysis, the culprit proved to be 
the metal used in the construction of the station, 
the majority of which had been manufactured on 
Tatooine. The ore, after refinement, seemed to 


Mos Eisley 


Ws 


randomly assume the properties of a magnet. 

Experiments were hurriedly performed, and it 
found that this reaction was linked to the 
cycles of the twin suns; the means to fix the ore 
was determined, but it was prohibitively expen- 
sive. Competing sources could charge one-fifth 
the final price that the miners would have to 
impose 

Tatooine's heyday was over. The mining cor- 
poration went bankrupt, and in a few short sea- 
sons the mines wereall but abandoned. Although 
some miners left Tatooine, most of the support 
services, moisture farms, and most of the colo- 
nists themselves, remained. 

The majority of mining equipment was sold off 
(or, in the case of the crawlers, abandoned and 
then reclaimed by the Jawas), and Mos Eisley 
eventually grew over the top of the excavations. 


Life After The Mines 


“If there's a bright center to the universe, you're 
on the planet that it's farthest from.” 


To say that Tatooine is far from the galactic 
mainstream is an understatement bordering on 
the ludicrous. While Tatooine is easy to get to, 
there are very few reasons to actually go there. 

As the mining industry collapsed, so did 
Tatooine's economy. Subsistence farming fed 
the population, and the sand provided some 
small revenue, but for the most part, the planet's 
trade was minimal. So far removed from the 
happenings of the galaxy was Tatooine that the 
passage from Republic to Empire was but achange 
of name to the local moisture farmers. 


AR 


Chapter One: Tatooine 


ARST 


8 Mos Eisley 


eT Ra C/E" One: Tatooine 


ARS 


The End of an Era 


Prefect Orun Depp was toying with his breakfast 
when the officer appeared. He pushed around the 
contents of his plate, upon which was resting the 
remainder of his one thousand one-hundred and thirty- 
eighth breakfast of poached Krayt egg and leg of 
Sandhawk. He welcomed the interruption. “Yes?” 

Lieutenant Harburik controlled his impulsetosneer. 
“ComScan reports that a Star Destroyer and a small 
Corvette dropped out of hyperspace half an hour ago. 
There was some exchange of laser fire. Governor 
Aryon has asked you to handle the matter.” 

The Prefect stood, hurriedly swallowing the re- 
maining bits of Krayt egg. “Weil, now, that is news. 
Well, well. It’s a good thing I — they'll have to parlay 
with me for the right to refuel, or whatever, right? 
Lieutenant, how much room is available in our jail?” 

Harburik sighed. “Sir, we have the Tonnika sisters; 
a Human was arrested for impersonating an Imperial 
officer; a Gamorrean is charged with beating a civil- 
ian; and a Rodian was caught pickpocketing.” 

“Hmm, Better release the twins. | want to have 
enough room for —" 

“Sir, the twins are by far the worst offenders of the 
lot!” 

“Lieutenant. An imperial Star Destroyer. Here. At 

tooine. Why, the implications of that are stagger- 
ing. Well, now ...” 

Harburik smiled to himself in anticipation of the 
reaction his next bit of news would have. “And, sir, 
they have just informed us they are sending down a 
detachment of stormtroopers.” 

The Prefect stared at Harburik as if he had three 
heads, and then began spinning around the room, 
bumping into everything. Harburik had the vague 
urge to grab the man as if he were a spinning top. 

“Informed us? Not requested? What is the meaning 
of this? There are proper channels which must be 
followed, after all. Don't you agree, lieutenant? We 


will see about this.” Depp broke off and strode out of 
the room. 

“Well, err, yes. Yes, sir,” he repeated again for 
emphasis, inwardly gloating over the Prefect's dis- 
comfort as he followed the man through the building 
and into the control center. 

“Let me talk to that captain. How dare he think he 
can simply send down troops without authorization.” 

Harburik excused the communications officer and 
sat at the console himself, signaling the Destroyer. 
Depp furiously paced the small room as the lieuten- 
ant tapped a few last controls and gestured over to 
the hologram pod. “Here you are, sir.” 

Depp stepped onto it, and as his image was being 
captured and transmitted to the Destroyer, a corre- 
sponding hologram formed in front of him 

“Now, just what is the meaning of this?” Depp 
began, but cut himself short as a chill swept through 
the chamber. “Why, err..." 

The raven figure flickered. “I have no time for 
pleasantries, Prefect. I have ordered a detachment of 
troops down to Mos Eisley on official business —" 

Depp clutched at every last wisp of fleeing outrage 
and swallowed hard. “Yes, but the proper channels 
need to be followed, uh, Lord Vader.” He felt his 
resolve weakening. “Even one such as yourself, ur, 
understands the need for discipline in the ranks.” His 
resolve wavered for a moment, then collapsed. “Isn't 
that right?” 

The holo image continued as if it had never been 
interrupted. “— by order of the Emperor. Expect two 
more Star Destroyers which shall constitute a quar- 
antine of Tatooine. Effective immediately. Is that 
clear, Prefect? 

“This, this is highly irregular ... but as you wish, 
Lord Vader.” The image faded, and Prefect Depp 
turned to Harburik, pulling on his collar. “Make ap- 
propriate accommodations for the soldiers, lieuten- 
ant. | want them to be served in every way possible." 


However, Tatooine has in many ways recov- 
ered, but not through respectable industry. An 
up-and-coming crime lord known as Jabba the 
Hutt selected Tatooine to be the base of his 
organization. 

Jabba's reasons for choosing Tatooineareclear. 
First, Tatooine is close to a major trade route, yet 
it is a world that is easily ignored. From Tatooine, 
itis easy to reach Alderaan and several minor trade 
worlds; from there, Imperial System (Coruscant), 
the Corellian System, and other major systems are 
easily accessible. On the other hand, there is no 
reason to venture to Tatooine — only a bunch of 
poor sand farmers. Jabba could be close to the 
action, yet remain virtually unnoticed. 


——— 


Mos Eisley 


Second, Jabba was able to secure some means 
of security. No one knows how or why, but Jabba 
was able to bribe or frighten the old Imperial Moff 
into ignoring his activities. Over the years, new 
Moffs have come and gone, but all have been 
subservient to the crime lord for reasons un- 
known. 

As a result, Tatooine is technically under the 
domain of the Empire. However, it has had a 
string of ineffective and apathetic governors. 
The desert world has become a center of smug- 
gling and criminal activities, with the galaxy at 
large unaware. In short, Tatooine is a world that 
no one notices or cares about. 

Tatooine still lacks a unified central govern- 


Nike V 


ment: there is so much unclaimed territory that 
oneis unnecessary. Representatives of eachtown- 
ship meet as necessary to discuss matters of 
trade and mutual defense. The Imperial governor 
issues decrees only as necessary to maintain the 
peace and collect taxes. As residents are fond of 
saying, “Tatooine isn't worth fighting over; 
big hunk of nothing.” 


The Economics of Sand 


Tatooine's economic picture seems univer- 
sally gloomy, at least in an analysis of official 
businesses. Tatooine is incapable of sustaining 
itself using planetary resources, with a trade 
imbalance that has yet to be adequately ad- 
dressed, at least officially. 


Chapter One: Tatooine Ru 
ARS 


Moisture Farming 

First, the moisture farmers are the very back- 
bone of the planet's economy. Moisture farms 
cover almost ten percent of the planet's surface: 
an incredible amount of land. It is a risky busi- 
ness and most farmers are barely getting by 
season after season. A few have managed to 
parlay their profits into larger and larger farms, 
but the vast majority continue to border on 
poverty. Water is one of Tatooine's most pre- 
cious commodities. In addition to its value for 
drinking and other essential uses, the harvested 
water is pumped into huge subterranean pro- 
duce gardens. 


Processed Sands 

The sand offers a creative being a means to 
live. Processed sodium sand is used in several 
polymers and glues common in industrial con- 
struction. However, Tatooine faces competition 
from many other sodium sand-rich worlds, not to 
mention a dozen other substitutes. Therefore, 
the market value is always in flux — a shipment 
might only be worth half its original value once it 
reaches its destination. 


Tatooine Sand Castings 
Third, sand is used to create Tatooine sand 
castings. Always on the lookout for the unique, the 
upper stratum of Imperial society discovered the 
value of this handcrafted art as unique conversa- 
tion pieces. Unfortunately, the demand for this fad, 
now five years old, appears to be leveling off. 


The Crime Lord 


Jabba the Hutt's criminal syndicate appears 
on no Imperial economic analysis, yet its mere 
presence sustains the entire planet's economy. 
‘The Hutt indirectly employs a good percentage 
of Mos Eisley's residents, and the government 
turns a blind eye to most of the Bloated One's 
revenue-producing exploits. 

The underworld itself traffics mostly in infor- 
mation, with smuggling illegal goods and infor- 
mation about smuggling illegal goods (both theirs 
and others’ operations), a close second. Mos 
Eisley's need to import most of its manufactured 
goods decreases official interest in the exact 
nature of a cargo. The situation encourages low- 
cost bribery and extortion as a way to move 
products smoothly. For whatever reason, the 
Imperial Moff of the sector has always made sure 
that Jabba can conduct his business undisturbed. 


Imperial Government 
The standard Imperial method of extracting 
subservience from client planets consists not so 
much of invasion as subversion, A token pres- 
ence is deposited, with the authority to shape 


Mos Eisley 


AR rs Chapter One: Tatooine 


"WA 


Governor Tour Aryon 
Template Type: Imperial Governor 
Loyalty: To the Empire 
Height: 1.6 meters Species: Human 
Sex: Female Homeworld: Treylon ll 
Age: 37 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Blaster 4D+1, dodge 4D+2, melee combat 4D, melee 
combat (vibroblades) 5D+1, melee parry 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Alien species 4D, bureaucracy 5D+2, cultures 4D+2, 
planetary systems: Tatooine 5D, streetwise 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D 
Beast riding 4D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 6D+1, command 7D, con 5D, gambling 
5D+1, persuasion 5D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 1D+1 
Special Abilities: None 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 11 
Move: 9 
Description: A finely-featured woman with an ebony 
complexion, sporting the latest fashions. She is slight 
of build, yet exhibits an imposing presence. 
Background: Tour's contributions to Tatooine have 
been mainly cultural: Bestine has the only museum on 
the planet, with a complete Krayt Dragon skeleton. Her 
lavish parties and expensive imported entertainment 
have kept her busy, although her efforts have been lost 
on the moisture farmers and mechanics. She has little 
respect for the residents of Mos Eisley and considers 
them peasants and savages. 
Personality: Tour is sharp and quick-witted. She 
can size up a situation in 
moments, and react accord- 
ingly. She often assumes an 
air ofa general inspecting her 
troops. 
Objectives: Keep Tatooine 
quiet, and thus secure an 
eventual promotion (and re- 
location). 
Quote: “Sigh. I will not 
postpone my garden party 
simply because Talmont can- 
not deal with a small insur- 
rection. | will handle it to- 
morrow.” 


Mos Eisley 


Kant Aryon 

Template Type: Retired Con Man 

Loyalty: To his wife 

Height: 1.7 meters 

Sex: Male 

Age: 32 

DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Blaster 5D+1, brawling parry 4D, dodge 6D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Cultures 4D, languages 4D, streetwise 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 4D+1, beast ridin; 

operation 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 4D, con 5D+1, gambling 6D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, Droid pro- 

gramming 4D+1, security 4D 

Force Sensitive?: Yes 

Force Point 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 10 

Move: 10 

Description: A robust man of medium height and 
ebony complexion, dressed in the latest Imperial 
fashions. He looks like he used to smile a great deal. 

Background: The son of a baron and baroness, 
Kant grew up in the lap of luxury. He has concocted 
many elaborate swindles and soon learned that a 
great deal of money was available for the asking if he 
played along. He has served as an agent for the 
gangster underworld for many years. 

His love of con games is matched only by his love for 
Tour. They met eight years ago and were soon married. 
It was blind luck that landed the two here on Tatooine, 

so near Jabba the Hutt. 
Personality: Kant is no 
longer the happy-go-lucky 
gambler. He is aware that 
his career could jeopardize 
the only thing in his life he 
truly cares about: Tour. This 
has turned him into a re- 
cluse, and a somewhat 
jumpy, nervous fellow. 


Species: Human 
Homeworld: Bethars 


3D+1, repulsorlift 


is personal life. 

: “I quite agree that 

the prefect can handle the 

disturbance, my dear. Here, 

let me prepare a whirlpool 
bath of Krayt egg salts.” 


11 


and mold law; the threat of an Imperial crack- 
down is enough to elicit obedience. From this 
position of strength, the local customs and rules 
are often modified to better fit the Imperial penal 
and revenue codes 

On Tatooine, this procedure fitted the needs 
of the Empire perfectly. Moff Julstan's appoint- 
ments have tended toward generating tax rev- 
enue and ignoring smuggling. To the average 
resident of Tatooine, the Empire was a long way 
away. 

The current governor of Tatooine, Tour Aryon, 
has taken even less of a hand in the daily affairs 
of her people. When first appointed, she moved 
her offices to an almost palatial house in Bestine, 
and appointed Orun Depp her Imperial Prefect, 
and charged him with running the day to day 
affairs of Tatooine. 

Aryon and Depp were under great pressue 
when the Empire turned its sights to the distant 
world in pursuit of two escaped Rebel Droids, but 
as the Imperial Fleet retreated, so things have 
gone back to normal. More stormtroopers have 
been garrisoned on the world, but they don't 
answer directly to the government, providing a 
convenient time lag for those, like Jabba, who 
benefit from unorganized military efforts. As a 
result, the extra troops are still unable to stifle 
smuggling — perhaps the desired result of some- 
one higher up in the Imperial chain of command 

After Depp's rather unfortunate demise, Aryon 


Chapter One: Tatooine m TAR 
ARST 


appointed Eugene Talmont as her new Prefect, 
advising him to keep a lower profile than his 
predecessor. 


How The Government Affects 
The Average Person 


As said before, to the average person who liv 
on Tatooine, the Empire is a very long way away. 
Unless one happens to bein the wrong place at the 
wrong time, the Empire's military forces are sel- 
dom encountered, and people don't see much of 
themilitia or the police either. People, especially in 
the isolated farming communities, are expected to 
take care of themselves, Because virtually every- 
one has some kind of weapon and homesteads are 
so scattered, there is a great amount of respect 
between neighbors — few people will ever rely on 
the courts when simple negotiation can solve most 
disputes. 

There are moderate sales, income and prop- 
erty taxes that everyone complains about but no 
one seems inclined to actually protest. Town- 
ships are self-governing, doing what they will 
with their own tax revenues — often little more 
than buying a few spare power generators or 
repairing something that was destroyed in one of 
the massive sandstorms. Each town also issues 
its own IDs to all citizens, although they all con- 
tain the same information: name, age, nearest 
relatives, occupation and address 


Mos Eisley 


STAR Chapter One: Tatooine 
ARE ee 


Tatooines Geography 


The course of the characters’ adventures may take 
them to some of the distant townships and locations 
of Tatooine. Some of the most likely destinations are 
described below. 

Anchorhead: Several hundred kilometers south- 
west of Mos Eisley, this farming hamlet has a popula- 
tion of only 700. The town itself only has a small 
cluster of buildings, including a transport station, a 
restaurant and other elementary services, but it serves 
a large community of moisture farmers. It is effec- 
tively cut off from Mos Eisley by the the Jundland 
Wastes. It is linked to Mos Eisley by regular transport 
service. 

Arnthout: A small farming community south of 
Bestine, with a population of about 350. 

Bestine: The official capital of Tatooine, Bestine is 
a small town about 200 kilometers to the west of Mos 

ley. Home to about one thousand permanent resi- 
dents, Bestine has the only museum on Tatooine and 
little else. 

Dune Sea: A vast desert expanse, stretching for 
thousands of kilometers, known for unbearably hot 
days and frigid nights. The Western Dune Sea borders 
on the Jundland Wastes. 

Fort Tusken: An abandoned settlement far along 
the northern reaches of the Jundland Wastes. It was 


Mos Eisley 


the site of the first conflict between Human settlers 
and the Sand People, or Tusken Raiders. 

Great Pit of Carkoon: A huge pit in the heart of the 
Dune Sea, home to the infamous Sarlace monster. 

Jabba the Hutt's Palace: Located thousands of kilo- 
meters from Mos Eisley, in a small range of hills within 
the Dune Sea, the Palace is where the infamous gangster 
holds court. Isolated from civilization, people seldom 
arrive at the palace unless they are wanted by Jabba. 

Jundland Wastes: A rough, dry canyon, mountain 
and mesa area, known to be nearly impassible except 
for the narrow Arnthout Pass. Known to be populated 
by Tusken Raiders, Krayt Dragons and many other 
dangerous creatures, The area runs along the West- 
ern Dune Sea, with a major branch cutting off 
Anchorhead and Mos Eisley. 

Mos Eisley: The center of civilization on Tatooine, 
Mos Eisley is a major spaceport and is a prominent 
base for smugglers and criminals. 

Motesta: A small farming hamlet in Arnthout Pa 

Tosche Station: A power, water and refueling de- 


pot about three kilometers due south of Anchorhead 
well respected by farmers in the 


The Tosche famil; 
Anchorhead region, 


Bestine. 
Abandoned 


e 
rt ih Mine 
ynthout 
. 4 * 


‘Mos Eisley 


Anchorhead 


Jorn Pau Lona 


13 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview. 


I Chapter Two 


AR 
ARST 


Mos Eisley Overview 


Mos Eisley is the only major civilized area on 
the vast desert planet of Tatooine, yet it is a 
dangerous, dirty and uncivilized port city, at 
least compared to the sprawling centers of trade 
inthe Core Worlds. The pirate city offers much to 
the daring and enterprising, but the meek should 
definitely stay in the farm towns. 

The average population of Mos Eisley is about 
50,000-60,000 beings. This estimate increases 
when the local harv come in, decreases when 
the economy of the sector sags, and increases 
(slightly) with tourism during Tatooine's “cool” 
season. Most transients live in Mos Eisley since 
there is little else on the planet 

The mix of species here is reminiscent of the 
Old Republic — a time when each species’ indi- 
vidual viewpoint and contributions were prized 


instead of belittled. Of course, the fact that there 
are potential fortunes to be made encourages 
people to be a little bit more accepting as well. 


Getting In. 


Approaching Mos Eisley from space, the city is 
unremarkable. Situated in a sprawling valley to 
the north of the Jundland Wastes, the city liter- 
ally simmers with the constant heat of the twin 
suns and the motion of its many inhabitants. 
For a complete overview of the standard land- 
ing procedure, see location 23, “Spaceport Con- 
trol Tower.” In general, unless a ship's pilot makes 
a stupid statement (such as “We're smuggler 
or “We're here on business from the Rebellion."), 
most ships are ushered into the city without any 


Mos Eisley 


-WAI 


serious scrutiny. lf a ship is identified as being in 
the employ of one of the local corporations the 
ship is virtually guaranteed to be allowed to land 
without hesitation. 


Customs 

Ostensibly, the customs office is supposed to 
prevent the smuggling of illegal goods and guar- 
antee that all products are properly taxed. In 
practice, customs officials spend more time col- 
lecting bribes than confiscating goods. 

Corporate docking bays are not subject to 
customs inspections in Mos Eisley. Instead, the 
companies each submit a seasonal list of incom- 
ing freight, upon which they pay two percent 
duties. This system is rife with deceit, but the city 
administration is understaffed and uncaring. 

Using a privately-owned docking bay means a 
ship may be visited by a customs inspector, 
although the process has evolved into a tradition 
of nearsightedness. Free traders who visit the 
spaceport are required to fill out a cargo mani- 
fest and transmit it to the docking bay's owners, 
who then havea week to file it with the spaceport 
control tower. Regulars have become adept at 
creative writing, offering such diverting prose as 
“socio-economic technical adjusters” when de- 
scribing a shipment of blasters. 

Physical inspections of incoming cargo are 
infrequent. Ifa ship does manage to get inspected 
(only about one in 500 ships are so honored), the 
inspector usually expects 100 credits or so to 


Mos Eisley 


s on Jabba's payroll, bribes for serious 
crimes, like spice smuggling or gun running, can 
be much higher. The inspectors don't expect an 
elaborate ruse, high-quality roleplaying ora song 
and dance to convince them that the smugglers 
are honest, happy-go-lucky touri hey simply 
want their credits and they will go away. 

Attempting to coerce or intimidate a customs 
official is a bad thing, and is one of the few things 
in this city that will summon police officers or 
stormtroopers, normally within a few minutes. 
The officials wear headset comlinks hard-coded 
to the spaceport control tower and police head- 
quarters. Customs officials in Mos Eisley are out 
for themselves. If Jabba wants a particular ship 
impounded, and heis willing to pay a thousand or 
so credits for the privilege, no one at customs will 
refuse him. Of course, if someone blows a whistle 
on one of the Hutt's shipments, Jabba can easily 
buy the officials’ ignorance. 


Customs Inspector: Putten Beatus 


Species: Near-Human 
Sex: Female 


Dodge 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

Alien species 3D, bureaucracy 5D, lan- 
guages 4D+2, law enforcement 5D+1, 
streetwise 2D+2, value 2D 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overy i€ W mS TAR 
eee mu — a = 


Finding Work 


“Is it watching us?" 

*What? Is what watching us?” 

“That Jawa over there — don't turn! Looks like it's 
got a comlink. It may be the same one who has been 
following us since we landed here this morning.” 
Vareth's brows furrowed in concentration over her 
fozbeer. It was bad enough that they had forged ship 
credentials, but they lacked time or money to even try 
and get their own ID's changed. And they certainly 
had no legitimate business in this city. Now she 
wished she hadn't let Garron talk her into this. Pull a 
job for a gangster like the Hutt? She almost shud- 
dered. But it was the only way to turn a quick credit. 
And it wasn't like they were preparing to engage in 
robbery or theft. Not really. 

She glanced at her companion. At least Garron 
looked pretty calm, But it was difficult to tell with a 
Sullustan. 

“How is it I am to tell you if he is watching or not, 
shall 1?” asked Garron. 

“Sigh. I don't know. I guess you can't. I wish we had 
an electronic scanner, or some kind of Droid eaves- 
dropper. Or maybe —" 

Garron cut her off. “Yawn.” 

*Pardon me?" asked Vareth, watching the Jawa out 
of the corner of her eye. 

“Yawn, yes. Trust me." 

Garron smiled. That was their personal signal, and 
their private joke. No one should ever trust a smug- 
gler. “Okay. 

Vareth did what she hoped was a good imitation of 
a yawn. She saw Garron's own jaw muscles clench 
until he finally succumbed to the overwhelming urge. 
And as she watched, the suspected spy turned away 
and put its hand to its mouth. Vareth grinned and 
momentarily considered the universality of the yawn 
reflex. 

“Good idea, Garron. Let's go." The two stood and 
swiftly left the cantina. Their exit was noted. 

‘The glare of the suns on the sand made Vareth want 
to turn back to the dim coolness of the bar. She 
glanced at Garron, who had already placed goggles 
over his sensitive eyes. 

“How do we find his place? This whole area is a 
maze. We went in to get directions, but nobody seemed 
to know.” 

“Perhaps perchance it is not we who need to find 
them; the other ones must find us?” 

“Yeah, maybe. Let's keep moving, though. I don't 
want to give anybody time to get a bead onus.” Vareth 
put her scarf up to her nose as they passed a group of 


Jawas. At least she had learned this much about 
Tatooine. 

“Excuse me,” spoke a metallic voice. Vareth froze. 
It sounded like a stormtrooper. She turned slowly 
around. She blinked once, then twice. There was no 
one there. 

“Excuse me,” the voice said again, from somewhere 
near her waist. Vareth looked down to see the Jawa 
holding a hand translator to its throat. “I have greet- 
ings from your employer. Please follow me.” 

“See what I have been telling is true now, yes?" 

“Shut up, Garron.” They followed the brown-cloaked 
figure as it weaved through the crowds, avoided a 
speeding landspeeder, and ducked into a dim door- 
way. Vareth easily kept stride with the creature as it 
sped down the cool dark tunnel, past passageways 
and side tunnels, first taking a left, then a right, 
skipping several doors, turning another corner, and 
finally stopping at a closed door. It muttered some- 
thing Vareth was sure would have been incomprehen- 
sible even if she had heard it clearly. The door slid 
open with a scraping sound of steel against sand. 

The room was dimly lit by a portable generator 
sitting on the floor. The earthy smell invading her 
nostrils was produced by the enormous number of 
mushrooms and other fungi covering the floor and 
walls. The only furniture in the room was a chair 
occupied by a pasty-looking Twi'lek, his head tails 
draped around his shoulders, The Twi'lek swallowed 
the last of his mushroom and licked his fingers. Vareth 
heard Garron enter the room behind her, and the door 
shut. This Twi'lek was egotistical indeed, to feel safe 
against two free-traders. Then again, Vareth reminded 
herself, they were here at his disposal to gain employ- 
ment. Still, showing any fear would likely not get them 
the job. 

“Yes,” the sitting being said, his left head tail twitch- 
ing, “you have been watched since you entered the 
system. And if you were to injure me, it is unlikely you 
could find your way back out of this maze.” 

Vareth straightened up to her full height. “Ofcourse. 
Except my friend here,” she stepped to the left to let 
the Twi'lek get a good view of Garron, “is a Sullustan. 
When it comes to tunnels they have a photographic 
memory. Shall we try this again?” She stepped for- 
ward. “My name is Vareth.” 

“Greetings, sly one. | am Bib Fortuna.” He paused 
for a moment to let the announcement sink in, as if it 
were some great pronouncement. Because of the way 
the Twi'lek carried himself, Vareth had an itching 
notion to kneel, but ignored it. Fortuna cleared his 
throat. “You appear adequate to the task.” 


Mos Eisley 


TAI 
WAI 


MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift operation 4D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 6D+1, con 5D, gambling 4D, 

search 6D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Security 3D, space transports repair 4D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Pe 

Character Points: 6 

Equipment: Headset comlink, blaster pistol 
(4D damage), datapad 

Description: A pale near-Human of indeter- 
minable heritage, Putten's gray skin and large 
ears have attracted quite a few stares over the 


s always been an out- 
cast, Eventually, she wound up in Mos Eisley, and 
decided to take up residence and find a job here. 

Personality: Gruff, demanding and abr: 
She does have a few close friends; everyone else 
is greeted with boundless hostility. 

Objectives: To be obnoxious and demanding 
up to the very limit of her target's patience. 

A Quote: “Sure you're a tourist — you're not 
fooling me, so give me another 50 credits, Hurry 
up so Í can get out of here. 


Other Options 


‘Those who are overly-sensitive about the pros- 
pect of being searched can always try a desert 
landing. While this normally isn't too hard, it isn’t 
very safe either. There is a very good chance that 
a ship out in the desert will get attacked by 
Tusken Raiders, torn apart by Krayt Dragons, 
dismantled by Jawas or simply blown away by 
the sudden and devastating sandstorms. There 
are a few private estates outside the city proper 
that might offer landing space. 

Entering Mos Eisley on foot or by vehicle is 
nothing unusual — this is how most moisture 
farmers and Jawas reach the area. There are 
daily transports to other towns on the planet, 
such as Bestine, Motesta, or Anchorhead (with 
its famous *circle-route" around the Jundland 
Wastes which has been romanticized in popular 

ongs). Trips from other towns on or near the 
Dune Sea require chartering a transport. 


Getting Out 


Itis always easier to get onto Tatooine than to 
leave. Pilots with legal documentation and unre- 
markable cargoes should have no trouble. The 
typical Mos Eisley freighter, however, has nei- 
ther. Freighters and scouts who arrive empty 
and prepare to leave apparently still empty are 


Mos Eisley 


expected to grease the servomotors before de- 
parture to prevent a sudden search. Delay also 
holds the captain liable for rental of the docking 
bay for as long as the ship is forced to remain, 

It is possible to simply leave without authori- 
zation. The reaction in such cases depends upon 
circumstances — if the bay is company-owned, it 
is likely to take a dim view of such hasty good- 
byes. This unhappiness often manifests itself in 
the manner of dispatching corporate starfighters, 
in hopes of persuading the offender to return and 
say a proper good-bye. 

Privately owned docking bays rarely have such 
options available. Instead, all information about 
the offender is transmitted to the authorities. On 
the off chance an Imperial cruiser is in orbit, has 
the time, and the captain is cooperative, the 
delinquent vessel might find itself outmatched. 
On rare occasions traffic control's antique cloud 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley OvervieW=—o TA Re 
ARS 


First Impressions 


The speeder inched its way slowly along the crooked 
streets. Dozens of disreputable-looking beings meandered 
through the maze, oblivious to the shiny speeder with the 
Imperial emblem. The place was hot, the buildings huddled 
close to the ground. Every so often a narrow alley offered 
shadows strung along its length, but the twin suns made 
sure that the shadows provided no relief from the heat. Or 
the smell. 

“It's not much to look at, is it?” sighed Prefect Eugene 
Talmont, tugging open the collar of his uniform. 

Lieutenant Harburik looked up from the instrument 
panel. "No, sir.” The soldier guickly weaved around a 
cluster of Jawas. The brown-cloaked creatures scuttled 
alongside the speeder for a few meters, stroking the hood 
and jabbering at each other. The Prefect noticed a few flies 
buzzing about the hoods of the short creatures and in- 
stinctively recoiled. He turned around to watch them as 
the speeder eventually outpaced them and the small be- 
ings receded into the distance. 

“Hmph. If this is the greatest settlement on the planet, 
I'd say that my stationing here will be a waste of my 
considerable talent. You'd think old Moff Julstan could 
find someplace more deserving of my skills as a negotiator: 
my learned finesse.” 

“Yes, sir. It's true that nothing much happens here.” 
Harburik had met the man only five minutes ago and 
already detested him. He decided to let the Prefect find out 
for himself just how much activity was seething under the 
surface of this docile-looking city. Perhaps that would 
learn some of the smugness out of him. 

“By the way, what do you know about why the old 
Prefect was removed from his post? | had heard of his 
general incompetence and idiosyncrasies — imagine wast- 
ing Imperial revenue on producing thousands of local 
maps to hand out free to visitors — but loosing general 
incompetence onto this backwater planet seems harmless 
enough.” 

“Prefect Depp was killed in the line of action, sir.” 

“On this planet?” Prefect Talmont shifted uncomfort- 
ably in his seat. “Surely not a local uprising?” 

“The report was a little vague, sir,” Harburik 
most infuriating drawl, enjoying the Prefect's discomfort. 
“Something about an assassin Droid, as | recall.” 

“Oh. Oh ... my." Talmont blanched and sat back. “Shall 
we put the canopy roof up? Yes, the canopy, think. We had 
better review the current police deployment once we 
reach my office. Oh, my.” 

The lieutenant smiled as he directed the speeder to- 
ward the Prefect's new office. 


car tugs are dispatched (it is even rarer for them 
to succeed in waylaying a ship). Most often the 
complaint is simply filed, and passed on to all 
databases controlling access to bays on the 
planet. 

Should Tatooine be placed under quarantine 


18 


(sucha thing has happened only once in modern 
history), the presence of Imperial Dreadnaught 
Cruisers (or larger ships) should dissuade any 
but the most foolhardy or courageous from at- 
tempting to run a blockade. 

Launching from outside a civilized area— the 
middle of the Jundland Wastes, for example — is 
usually performed without incident ... as long as 
the ship has not been buried by sandstorms or 
dismantled by Jawas by the time you return to it. 


The City 


From a distance, much*of Mos Eisley blends 
into the desert. Sand-colored mounds disappear 
among the wavy currents of heat rising from the 
sunbaked land. Closer inspection, however, be- 
gins to reveal definition and purpose. Low grade 
concrete, stone and plastoid mounds spread out 
from power and water distribution plants like 
disease on a Gundark's wing. As form follows 
function, these buildings have curves and domed 
roofs to support the weight of the sand and to 
passively minimize dune buildup. Resistance to 
sandstorms is greatly improved by a subterra- 
nean emphasis. The domes also help reduce the 
size of mysterious mists which rise regularly 
from the groundat the points where desert sands 
wash up against unyielding cliffs and mesas, 
encumbering travelers with obscuring fog. 

Although traditional Mos Eisley construction 
is underground, with perhaps one or two stories 
poking their heads out of the sand into the in- 
tense heat of the suns, some of the newer build- 
ings, mostly commercial, are four or five stories 
igh. Pourstone walls mask durasteel double 
walls with circulating coolant flowing freely be- 
tween. This enables multi-story construction 
above ground and circumvents the problems of 
shifting sands during construction of the tradi- 
tional two- or three-story pits. Virtually all build- 
ing entrances are equipped with electrostatic 
repellors (in varying degrees of repair) called 
sand traps, designed to keep entrances clear of 
the drifting sands. 

Mos Eisley has never been a community fix- 
ated onurban planning. In this city, family houses 
are built next to landing bays and across the 
street from heavy manufacturing factories. In 
short, the city is a hodge-podge of construction, 
with few true neighborhoods. Adding to the con- 
fusion is the fact that none of the streets have 
been surfaced or even named — directions are 
given by businesses and landmarks instead of 
street crossings. It's assumed that if someone 
wants to go somewhere they'll know how to find 
it. 

Atthe heart of the city are the original space- 
port docking bays, along with the power and 
water distribution plants that supply the city's 


Mos Eisley 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


19 


Mos Eisley 


CI 


hapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview: 


core buildings. The spaceport control tower is 
located here. Due to Mos Eisley's typical lack of 
initiative and funds, the collection and distribu- 
tion water and power network still does not 
reach the majority of the city. This means that 
moisture vaporators, seen by the hundreds out 
on Tatooine's omnipresent moisture farms, can 
also be found tucked into numerous corners and 


s also over the site of the old ore 
mine and the ground is pocketed with shifting 
and unstable sands. There are minor sinkholes 
which appear and disappear at the slightest sand- 
storm. 

There are many factories to the north of the 
city, including Notsub Shipping, Tatooine's larg- 
est company. Other industries include limited 
goods manufacturing (from the specially treated 
ores), including Droids, landspeeders and sand 
skiffs. 


The Underground 


The wholly unregulated part of the city lies 
beneath Mos Eisley. The abandoned mines and 
excavations left by the original settlers remain 
hidden far below the surface. Some corporations 
use the shafts, crevices, and dead-ends as dump- 
ing areas for contraband goods or toxic waste, 
for discreet agro farming, or for illegal opera- 
tions. Jabba's cronies use the tunnels as a means 
to enter and leave the city without being ob- 
served, and as rent-free warehouses. 

The Imperial government, of course, has some 


knowledge of the existence of these tunnels, but 
no real hint how extensive they are. The new 
Prefect has neither the interest, the time, nor the 
personnel to even begin charting a piece of the 
city which (so far) has not caused him any prob- 
lems. 

Jabba's operatives, on the other hand, have 
mapped out more of the caverns than all the 
corporations put together, But this actually means 
that no more than a fifth of the caverns have been 
explored .. 


Mos Eisleys Government 


Mos Eisley is run solely by the dictates of the 
Imperial Prefect, who has ail of his dec p- 
proved by the planetary governor. This system 
allows the most direct and effective method of 
bribery and intimidation. Jabba the Hutt has 
found much influence with Prefect Talmont's 
government by bribing most of his main advi- 
sors 


Law Enforcement 
(Or The Lack Thereof) 

Mos Eisley has a limited police force, newly 
created through the governor's edict. Some of 
these officers are former militia members, and 
now get paid a better salary for the same duties 
they were already performing. Only now, they 
work at it full-time and have spiffy new uniforms 
and vehicles. Although the police force is small, 
the city still relies upon remaining available mem- 
bers of the local militia (both current and re- 
tired) for any real trouble. 


20 


Mos Eisley 


TR CA DIET TWO: Mos Eisley Overview 


"WA! 


Most businesses employ private security 
guards. And those that do not are relatively new, 
have other means of protection, have little worth 
taking, or quickly find the guards' employment 
well worth the expense. 

It is commonly believed that the location of 
Jabba's Townhouse in the city deters criminals 
from indiscriminately plying their trade. This is 
true, but only because Jabba himself hands out 
neighborhood “licenses” for various gangs and 
hoods. They help reinforce his will, insure prompt 
payment of protection money (for those few 
businesses Jabba feels can afford to pay — hehas 
no desire, so to speak, to lay Bantha fodder in hi: 
own backyard), and keep an eye out for informa- 
tion. After all, the Kubaz known as Garindan (Mos 
Eisley's premiere spy, recently added to Jabba's 
full-time payroll) can't be everywhere at once. 

All these factors combine to make the city a 
relaxing place for Jabba and his cronies. No one 
can cause trouble without Jabba hearing of it, 
cither through reports by security guards or by 
his many, many eyes on the streets. This suits 
Jabba fine, but makes newcomers very nervous. 


Crime & Punishment 

Mos Eisley takes a rather leisurely attitude 
toward crime. Law and order is more of a sugges- 
tion than a policy. As a result, the courts empha- 
size localized conditions, welcome attempts at 
bribery and political influence, and plaintiffs ac- 
tually expect extremes in style and degree of 
chastisements. The specifics depend upon who 
the victim is, who the perpetrator is, and where 
the crime occurred. 

‘A crime deemed by a judge to be directed 
against the Empire or the general welfare of its 
citizens (a term designed to be as vague as pos- 
sible) typically causes the defendant to receive a 
strict sentence. However, this claim is normally 
only levied against non-Tatooine residents who 
commit offenses against natives; crime commit- 
ted by a full-time resident against another is 
likely to be treated as a minor crime. 

It is generally difficult to get arrested in Mos 
Eisley for those who possess a modicum of self 
restraint and common sense. Minor infractions 
are often overlooked: this is a place where beings 
from all across the galaxy meet, and do 
business. It is unlikely that all who visit have a 
grasp of local customs and laws. The police are 
aware that the traders expect more tolerance 
here in the Outer Rim Territories than in the Core 
Worlds. Besides, a city which permits its citizens 
to openly carry small arms is obviously not going 
to employ a trigger-happy squad of constables. 

However, once in trouble, things can get seri- 
ous very quickly for outsiders. A lawyer experi- 
enced in both Tatooine and Imperial law is al- 


Mos Eisley 


most arequirement if the defendants are to stand 
a chance of avoiding a slave gang. 


Infractions and Consequences 

The most serious infractions committed in 
Mos Eisley (and which are brought to trial) areas 
follows, identified by the Imperial Penal Refer- 
ence. Local Tatooine laws which are on the books 
— but not necessarily enforced — are indicated 
byparentheses. While the punishments for these 
crimes are clustered on the low end of the indi- 
cated consequences, and often include attempted 
rehabilitation, they are listed here for easy com- 
parison of severity. 


Class One Infraction 

* Conspiracy to overthrow the Empire 
* Treason against the Empire 
+ Attack on a ship 
+ Aggression against a member of the Imperial 
Armed Forces 

Consequences: Arrest, five to 30 standard 
years in a penal colony, loss of business or pilot 
license, possible execution. 


Class Two Infraction 

* Shipment of high-energy weapons without a 
permit 
* Purchase or transportation of stolen goods 
e Possession, purchase or transportation of ille- 
gal or restricted items 
* (Murder or manslaughter) 
e (Fraud or embezzlement against the govern- 
ment or an individual) 
e (Aggression against a member of Mos Eisley's 
police or militia forces) 

Consequences: Arrest, fined up to 10,000 cred- 
its, five to 30 standard years in jail, probable loss 
of business or pilot license. 


Class Three Infraction 
* Attempted bribery of an Imperial official 
+ (Grand theft landspeeder) 
* (Aiding and abetting a known felon) 
Consequences: Arrest, fined 250 to 5,000 cred- 
„and/or up to two standard years in jail, pos- 
sible loss of business or pilot license. 


Class Four Infraction 


* Purchase or transportation of any narcotic 
without a permit 

+ Purchase or transportation of any goods re- 
quiring a permit, with said lacking 

* Purchase or use of any vessel or vehicle while 
lacking an operating license 

+ Possession, purchase or transportation of un- 
restricted items in quantity without proper taxa- 
tion 

* (Attempted or achieved transportation off 
planet of manufactured goods containing 


Chapter Two: Mos 


Tatooine ore) 
* (Assault) 

Consequences: Arrest, fined 175 to 5,000 cred- 
its, and/or up to one standard month in jail 


Class Five Infraction 
* Lack of proper emergency equipment for any 
vessel or vehicle (including escape pods) 
* (Public drunkenness, lewd behavior, violent 
behavior) 
Consequence: 


Stormtroopers 
There is currently a detachment of about 
stormtroopers in Mos Eisley, deposited here af- 
ter an unfortunate incident involving a pair of 
Droids and their young owner from Anchorhead. 
The stormtroopers are assigned to the gover- 


ined 100 to 5,000 credits 


ey OV CLV CW nS TAR 


ARST 


nor, but they aren't under her direct command. 
Theyareanswerable directly to Imperial military 
officials — off-planet and very far away. Ás a 
result, they generally determine for themselves 
what tasks they are supposed to accomplish and 
what they can choose to avoid. They accompany 
Governor Aryon and her husband on their trips 
“into the country” or to Mos Eisley, and perform 
law enforcement duties that the police and mili- 
tia can't handle on their own. 

Some say the arrangement makes good mili- 
tarysense: the Imperial presence requires a force 
which can react without emotional ties to those 
it is subjugating. Others suggest that posting 
someone here is punishment for incompetence. 

The garrison has full access to all equipment 
possessed by the police force. They also maintain 
a fleet of military speeder bikes for their own use. 

One would suspect that this group of 
stormtroopers would crack down on smuggling, 
In fact, if they knew the extent of what was going 
on, they would attempt a crackdown. However, 
the local government doesn't talk about thesmug- 
gling (since most of the officials would end up 
executed for corruption and bribery). Jabba's 
contacts, both in the local government and with 
the sector Moff, enables him to keep a close 
watch on the activities of the troopers and pro- 
tect his operatives — making any smuggling ac- 
tivities that are discovered appear to be small, 
localized organizations 


Typical Tatooine Stormtrooper 
Template Type: Desert Terrain 
Stormtrooper 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, blaster: blaster rifle 5D, 
brawling parry 4D, dodge 3D+2, melee 
combat 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy 2D+1, intimidation 3D+2, law 
enforcement 3D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Repulsorlift operation 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 2D+2 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 4D+1 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 0-5 
Eguipment: Heat-reflective armor (+1D from 
energy, +2D from physical attacks; + 1D to Strength, 
-1D to Dexterity), comlink, filtermask, blaster rifle 
(5D damage, 3-30/100/300), blaster pistol (4D 
damage, 3-10/30/120) 

A Quote: “Let me see your identification. 


Mos Eisley 


TA 
"WA! 


Speeder Bike 

Craft: Aratech 74-Z Military Speeder Bike 
peeder bike 
Speeder 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: speeder bike 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: none 

Cover: 1/4 

Cargo Capacity: 3 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level - 5 meters 

Cost: 7,000 credits 

Move: 140: 400 KMH 

Maneuverability: 3D+2 

Body Strength: 2D 

Weapons: 

Laser Cannon 
Fire Control: 2D 
Damage: 3D 

Speeder bikes sacrifice altitude for speed, and 
the 74-Zis no exception, This particular brand of 
bike is mass-produced for the ever-growing Im- 
perial war machine, and the bikes have even 
reached the desert world of Tatooine. Here, they 
are officially restricted to law enforcement per- 
sonnel. Realis yrmtroopers have 
access to the bikes are considered undig- 
nified transportation by many local officials, while 
the stormtroopers consider them excellent craft 
for the desert terr 


Police Deployment 
The police patrol on foot, scooter and Dewback 
(see location 10, “Dewback Stables” for statis- 


‘ooters because they can 
offenders more effectively, and the 
ran cover more ground. The eight scooters in 
the pc n of the Mos Eisley force are kept in 
good condition via an extensive maintenance 
routine conducted at the police station gar 

The police use Dewback beasts only rarely, 
when scooters aren't available and there is more 
territory to be patrolled than a foot patrol can 
cover. 

The chief of police, Lieutenant Harburik, re- 
ports directly to Prefect Talmont. He is unhappy 
with this arrangement, correctly identifying 
Talmont as an ineffective leader and lazy bureau: 
crat. However, his military background almost 
assures that he will blindly follow any imposed 
procedures. It has not yet occurred to him that 
his police force outnumbers the Imperial pres- 
ence. It has occurred to him, however, that the 
Empire could easily reduce the planet to slag. 

Typical Mos Eisley Police Officer 

Template Type: Police Officer 

DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D+2, melee combat 


comlin! 
attacks), blaster pistol (4D damage, 3-10/30/120), 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


Languages 3D+1, law enforcement 5D:2, 
streetwise 4D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift operation 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 


TECHNICAL 2D 
Security 2D+1 
Fore iv 
Force Points: () 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-5 

Equipment: Protective desert clothing, 
„filtermask, riot armor (+1D from energy 


———— ees 


Mos Eisley 


23 


hapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview. 


Prefect Eugene Talmont 
Template Type: Imperial Prefect 


DEXTERITY 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 


Bureaucracy 6D+1, languages 4D+2, law 


enforcement 3D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 

Beast riding 5D 
PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+2, command 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 3D 

Force Sensitive?: No 


Force Points: 0 


Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Point 


Description: A slight-built wiry man of 
an obvious tou- 


medium height, he h 
pee. 


Background: Born and bred to serve 
the Empire, Eugene's unremarkable 


force pike (4D damage). 
A Quote: “All right, break it up. Both oi 
out of here and I won't report this. Again 


Dewback 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 4D+1 
Orneriness: 3D 
Move: 35; 100 KMH (during day)/ 7; 20 
KMH (at night) 


uget 


en ST ZA mn 


ARS 


background and unsmeared reputa- 
tion led him from one boring post to 
another. Talmont was never very 
thrilled about the post at Mos Eisley 
— once he learned that the old Pre- 
fect, Orun Depp, had been killed by an 
assassin Droid, he went from apathetic 
to fearful. Now Eugene makes do, hop- 
ing for a transfer from this hideous 
world 


Personality: Eugene is full of himself 
and misjudges his importance. The 
Prefect is nearsighted, but is too vain 
to wear corrective lenses. He is impa- 
tient with his subordinates when tense, 
but otherwise treats them well. 
Objectives: To increase his prestige 
while avoiding Governor Tour Aryon. 
A Quote: “I see! They think they can 
get away with it, but they have yet to 
deal with Prefect Talmont!” 


Size: 2.1 meters at the shoulder 

These lizards are huge omnivores native to 
Tatooine. Active during the heat of the day, they 
become docile and sluggish at night. The police 
utilize these animals when patrolling outside the 
city proper. They are less likely to be affected by 
sandstorms than are landspeeders, usually ig- 
noring the storm's effect: si ir 
destination. When Dewbacks eat me: 
prey is Womp Rat-size or smaller. 


Mos Eisley 


S T A Ro CE TWO: Mos Eisley Overview 
wars Orr's 


Lieutenant Harburik 


DEXTERITY 4D+1 

Blaster 6D+1, brawling parry 4D+1, 
dodge 6D+2, grenade 4D+2, melee 
combat 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 3D, repulsorlift opera- 
tion 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Gambling 6D, search 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, 
demolition 4D+2, security 5D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 6 

Eguipment: Armored blast vest (+1D 
to front from both physical and en- 
ergy attacks), heavy blaster pistol 
(5D damage, 3-7/25/50), comlink, ho- 
lographic imager, macrobinoculars. 
Description: A large, well-muscled 
man. He would be devastatingly 


handsome except for the vicious look in 
his eyes. 


Background: Harburik represents every- 
thing that is reprehensible about the New 
Order. Harburik originally resented being 
posted as personal liaison to the Prefect, 
especially as he had to assume the dead 
Prefect's responsibilities while Mos Eisley 
waited for a replacement. He soon real- 
ized that the power vacuum could be 
turned to his advantage and now enjoys 
his new position as Chief of Police. He 
likes being a large fish in a small pond. His 
biggest problem is Prefect Talmont's 
pompous and overbearing demeanor. He 
has not yet decided how to go about 
replacing the man with someone more 
capable, but a trend of Prefects being 
killed by assassin Droids is appealing. 


Personality: Crass, rude, and cruelare the anchor points 
of Harburik's personality. He is well known for abusing 
every subordinate who comes into contact with him. 


Objectives: To keep his power base from transferring to 
Prefect Talmont. 


A Quote: “No problem. You don't want to tell me who 
paid you off, so I'll just take this weapon off the stun 
setting.” 


Mos Eisley 


25 


— NEITI STOP GE 
, Ke V» Mos Eisley Central Sector A Cy A; 
$ Mos Eisley Central Sec as 
REL ( SSA XG 


> 


T Mos Eisley 


STi 
"WA! 


INM Locations 
EIN Docking Bay 94 


Docking Bay 94 is typical of the numerous 
landing bays scattered throughout the city: little 
more than a large pit gouged in the soil, with a 
simple entrance ramp for removing cargo and 
three sets of stairs to the surface (one is directly 
to street level, while the other set runs by loca- 
tion 2, “Spaceport Customs,” described on page 
31). Much of the bay is below ground level —the 
floor of the bay itself is 10 meters down, as are the 
offices and maintenance 
faciliti 

Thebaysaresmalland 
old, harkeningbacktothe 
time when landing craft 
were mostly shuttles to 
orbiting ships or small 
tramp freighters, such as 
thewidely-found YT-1300. 
They were designed to 
withstand the backblast 
of the older Orion-style 
ion sublight engines 
Since most modern ship: 
are equipped with the 
much more efficient 
Hoersch-Kessel ion drive 
and repulsorlift units for 
finemaneuvering, the pits 
are no longer necessary 
but they remain in use 
rather than spend the 
credits to build new fa- 
cilities. 

Ohwun De Maal, with 
his mate Chachi, are the 
proud owners of Dock- 
ing Bay 94 and are con- 
sidered to run some of 
the best independent 
bays in Mos Eisley. Like 
the other independents, 
the frequency of the De 
Maal's business is di- 
rectly tied to “gifts” be- 
stowed upon Jabba the 
Hutt. But sincethecrime 
lord alsoinsures protec- 
tion from harassing 
thugs and busybody gov- 


Mos Eisley 


ernment officials, the De Maals (until recently) 
did not begrudge the high insurance premiums. 

Mos Eisley's docking bay rates are far below 
galactic standard — Docking Bay 94 charges 25 
credits a day for the bay (raised twice from the 
original 20). Restocking and resupply fees are 8 
credits per person's worth of consumables for 
one day (about 20% below standard rates); fuel 
cells are replaced at a cost of 10 credits per cell 


Docking Bay 94 


“ohn Paul Lona 


standard light freighter has 50 cells). 

The De Maals employ three part-time assis- 
tants who load and unload cargo, service the 
ships which come in, do moderate cleaning and 
maintenance chores, perform Mynock inspec- 
tions, and supervise delivery of goods. They also 
work at the De Maals other docking bays and 
warehouses. They also have an odd assortment 
of Droids underfoot who seem always to be busy 
working at things, but never seem capable of 
finishing a job without organic help. 

1. Office: This room contains the transmitter 
for scheduling services with spaceport control, 
as well as filing and coordination computers. 
This room also holds all authorization permits 
needed to operate the bay. 

2. Restroom: Public restroom. Usable but not 
pretty. 

3. Maintenance Garage: This room holds most 
of the machinery needed to service the ships 
which arrive here. It includes two binary load 
lifters for transporting cargo to and froma ship's 
hold. If Geordi Hans from Spaceport Speeders 
around, he'll usually be found in here, tinkering. 

4. Ship Supplies: Everything from oxygen to 
lubricant to basic proteins (for ship food converter 
systems) are stored here. The materials are pur- 
chased in bulk and meted out to ships as part of the 
common usage fee for the landing bay. 

5. Passenger Entrance: All bipedal crew mem- 
bers and passengers use this accessway to and 
from the bay. At the top of the stairs is a blast 
door (Strength 6D Character-scale) which can be 
sealed, but is usually left open while a ship is 
docked. Beggars and flim-flam artists (playing 


"AR 


ARST 


simple shell games) mark off territory and posi- 
tion themselves to be the first to take advantage 
of any new arrivals, while pickpockets watch to 
see who has money. Itis unlikely that any of these 
characters has any useful information, but oc: 
sionally one of Jabba's or Valarian's cronies 
be spotted sulking about. The alley has been 
quiet as of late, with the reduced traffic to Bay 94 
The De Maals would like to see the alleyway kept 
clear of such riffraff, but they have little chance of 
being able to get anything done about it. 

6. Back Blast Ceiling Vent: These vents were 
designed to soften the discharge of radiation 
from Orion ion sublight engines. Although the De 
Maals keep the vents clear (as per regulations), 
there hasn't been a use for them for over seventy 
year: 

7.Sand Trap: A lot of sand gets kicked up when 
a craft enters or leaves the bay. These electro- 
static repellors help restrain the sandstorm to 
the pit itself: especially important if the door is 
open at the top of the passenger entrance stair- 
way. 

8. Fusion Generators: The three converters 
sitting out in the bay are hooked into the huge 
fusion generator mounted at back of the mainte- 
nance garage. They are used to refuel ships, 
recharging the ship's power cells. The De Maals 
charge the going rate, or ten credits for recharg- 
ing one cell per hour. A typical empty light 
freighter can be charged in 50 hours. 

9. Landing Lights: The eight landing lights 
mark off the landing circle in Docking Bay 94 for 
night landings. 

10. Docking Pit: The floor of the bay is heavily 


Mos Eisley 


AR —— LO 
= ae i — — 


WA 


reinforced durasteel, and the walls (not needing 
to handle as much weight) are lighter pourstone. 

11. Entrance Ramp: This powered ramp is 
used to transport cargo or non-ambulatory pas- 
sengers to and from the bay floor to the surface. 
When fully extended the ramp runs nearly to the 
center of the pit floor. It exits into a wide service 
alle; 

12. Tractor Beams: Built into the bay wall at 
ground level, these eight small standard tractor 
beam dishes can grab ships that are within 100 
meters of Docking Bay 94. The tractor beams are 
linked, with a combined Strength rating of 2D 
(starfighter scale): insufficient to hold a ship 
against the pilot's will, but strong enough to 
guide a willing ship to its berth. 

Two of the beams are starting to give out, so 
One of the De Maals must be on hand to run the 
tractor beam computer and manually compen- 
sate for their weakened pull. The computer is 
located in the Office (location one) and the op- 
erator must watch through video monitors. 

13. Service Entrance. This entrance, a simple 
stairwell leading to a blast door at surface level, 
was originally built with the bay, but the De Maals 
have never used it. The blast door leads to a 
short hallway, which opens into the street. 

14. Customs Inspector's Office. Discussed in 
location 2, “Spaceport Customs,” page 31. 


The De Maals 

The De Maals also own five other docking bays 
(27, 43, 67, 71 and 86), a service shuttle, and eight 
nearby warehouses, from which they make most 
of their profit. The warehouses charge 5 credits 
per ton of cargo storage per week (average for 
Mos Eisley), and each can hold 250 tons of cargo. 

Current relations between the De Maals and 
Jabba are strained. One of their regular custom- 
ers, a Corellian smuggler who regularly worked 
for Jabba, defied the quarantine of Mos Eisley 
and took off from their bay. It took almost an 
entire season for the De Maals to prove their 
innocence in the affair — although it may just be 
that the authorities waited until things quieted 
down to hand back their docking permit. 

Nonetheless, the Hutt was supposed to handle 
such interferences. Although he arranged for 
bail while the charges were pending, they were 
required to pay it back (with 25% interest — a 
relatively modest rate for Jabba). The loss of a 
season, and their good name, has not been over- 
come. Their business is still only three-fourths of 
what it should be. Chachi and Ohwun haven't 
quite decided what to do about it, nor have they 
figured out how to collect on the outstanding 
debt of the formerly-honorable Corellian who 
skipped out on them. 


Chachi De Maal 
Template Type: Duros Docking Bay Owner 
Loyalty: To Ohwun De Maal 
Height: 1.8 meters 
Species: Duros 
Sex: Female 
Homeworld: Duro System, Jivv Space City 
Age:35 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D+1, blaster: blaster pistol 5D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Alien species 3D+1, alien species: Humans 
5D, languages 3D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Communications 3D+2, repulsorlift opera- 
tion 4D+1, space transports 6D 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Bargain 5D+2 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Computer programming/repair 4D, space 
transports repair 7D+2 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 
Character Point 
Ohwun De Maal 
Template Type: Duros Businessman 
Loyalty: To Chachi De Maal 
Height: 1.8 meters 
Speci 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Tatooine 


Blaster 3D+2, dodge 5D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
3D, alien species: Humans 
ss 4D+1 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation 6D+1, 
sensors 3D+2, space transports 5D, space 
transports: YT-1300 7D, space transports: 
Service Shuttle 23K 7D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Bargain 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Droid programming 5D+1, Droid repair 5D, 
medicine 4D, space transports repair 7D+2 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 10 
Special Abilities: 
Starship Intuition: Duros make very capable 
starship pilots. When a character is generated, 
he may only place 1D in the following skills, but 


Mos Eisley 


29 


Arjon F.M.P. 


Template Type: Flighty Card Shark 
Loyalty: To herself and then the 


De Maals 
Height: 1.5 meters 
Species: Human 
Sex: Female 
Homeworld: Ord Mantell 
Age: 24 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Blaster 4D+2, dodge 5D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 


Languages 4D+1, planetary systems 5D 


MECHANICAL 2D 


Astrogation 3D+1, space transports 4D 


PERCEPTION 3D 


Con 4D, con: card sharking 5D+2, gam- 


bling 6D+1, persuasion 5D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 5D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 


Computer programming/repair 3D 


Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 4 


Equipment: Comlink, hold-out blaster 
(3D+1 damage, 3-4/8/12), card deck, 


clothes. 


Description: Arjon F.M.P. has golden- 


receives 2D in those skills: archaic starship pilot- 
ing, astrogation, capital ship gunnery, capital ship 
shields, sensors, space transports, starfighter pilot- 
ing, starship gunnery, and starship shields, This 
bonus also applies to any specializations. 

Equipment: Comlink (on belt), work clothes, 
various starship repair tools, datapad, 100 cred- 
its, magnetic grapplers, fusion welder (5D dam- 
age, | meter range) 

Description: Chachi and Ohwun De Maal ap- 
pear to be unremarkable Duros. Their blue skin, 
noseless faces, similar body types and slitted 
mouths contribute to their undifferentiated ap- 
pearance. This makes them difficult to distin- 
guish from each other. 

Background: The De Maals, it seems, have 
always owned Docking Bay 94. Actually, Ohwun's 
parents owned it before him, and his grand- 
mother before them. The De Maals are hard- 
working, decent beings, who want nothing more 
than to have the gangsters and the civil war go 
away. As this does not look likely, they are con- 
sidering alternate avenues, but aren't really sure 
what it is that they want. 


yellow skin and almond-shaped eyes. 
She dressesin typical Tatooine browns 
and tans. 


Background: Arjon F.M.P. (*F.M.P." to 
her friends) stopped at Tatooine for a 
layover and never boarded her con- 
necting flight. She no longer is sure why 
she stays: her home is long gone, her 
lover has no doubt stopped wondering 
what happened to her, and her own 
memory of that life has faded. Arjon has 
taken up card sharking in the alley di- 
rectly adjacent to Docking Bay 94. She 
has a continuing feud with the begging 
Jawa further down the alley. 
Objectives: Keep her spot in the alley, 
keep food in her belly and an eye out 
for news 

Personality: F.M.P. is a typical gre- 
gariousconartist,withnorealscruples 
about deceiving a naive passerb; 
does not otherwise engage in stealing: 
pickpocketing, for example, offends 
her. 


A Quote: “Step right up. Choose your 
card, let me guess which oneit is. Ifl’'m 
wrong, you win the pot. I've got a one 
in sixty-three chance. C'mon, place 
your bets.” 


Personality: Chachi and Ohwun are devout 
Duros, who follow in the traditions of their folks. 
This means walk quietly, talk quietly, play fairly. 

Objectives: To stay on Mos Eisley with their 
friends and to make a decent, honest living. 

‘A Quote: “Sure, we can have you refueled in 
less than a day. Your fuel cells just need some 
topping off. Glad to oblige for a good customer, 
Han.” 


The Service Shuttle 


Many landing bay services can gain additional 
income by using service shuttles to refuel large, 
non-atmospheric craft. In addition, some landing 
bay companies offer shuttle service between the 
surface and the spacecraft. The De Maals are no 
exception. 

They own a dilapidated, but sturdy Gallofree 
Yards service shuttle which has room to trar 
port small groups planetside and enough med 
cal supplies to aid small crews in distress. They 
charge 10 credits to restock the equivalent of one 
day’s worth of supplies for one person (minimum 
charge of 250 credits). Replacement fuel cells are 


Mos Eisley 


Rs LOCATIONS 
FR 


replaced ata flat 25 credits each. Shuttle fares are 
20 credits per person one way. 

Docking Bay 94 holds a contract with Space- 
port Speeders to regularly inspect and service 
the service shuttle, as well as their pair of binary 
load lifters. 


Gallofree Yards Service Shuttle 
Craft: Gallofree Yards Service Shuttle 
Type: Orbital service shuttle 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 18 meters 
Space transports: Service Shuttle 


Space transports 4D 


Cargo Capacity: 1 metric ton* 


small, dingy office, adjacent to Docking Bay 
s as a field office for customs officers who 
must work in the inner sections of Mos Eisley (the 
central offi part of location “Mos Eisley 
Spaceport Control Tower" several blocks away) 

Due to the rather lax customs regulations of 
Mos Eisley, this building is vacant most of the 
time — dust has settled throughout the rooms 
and each has a stuffy smell, as if the ventilators 
have broken down (they have). 

‘There are three doors to get into the building: 
one onasecond floor balcony, one openingin the 
streets of Mos Eisley, and one along the stairwell 
corridor leading from the surface to Docking Bay 
94. Each has a Strength 3D door with a lock 
requiring an Easy security roll to open 

1. Security Chief's Office. This office has never 
been used, but it is slated for Mos Eisley's Secu- 
rity Chief, who never leaves the Spaceport Con- 
trol Tower if he can help it. The room has a des 
and a chair; the computer was stolen long ago by 
a deputy customs officer. 

2. Assistant’s Office. The Security Chie! 
sistant, Gevrell, works in this office. He is only 
found here when he's trying to hide from his boss 
and avoid getting work done. Most of the time he 
simply drops datadisks on the desks of his assis- 
tants (rooms three and four). 

The room has a desk, a reclining chair, a 
computer, a holographic portrait of Gevrell's 
wife (an unattractive woman of indeterminable 
age), along with a broken fan. There is also an 
audio comm terminal (this system is used 
throughout the city). 

3, 4. Inspectors’ Offices. All of the less experi- 
enced inspectors operate out of these offices — 
there are eight desks per room (all seem to be in 


Consumables: Í day 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: none 
Hyperdrive Backu 
Nav Computer: none 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Space: 2 
Atmosphere: 
Hull: 1D+1 


one 


Focus: 1/2D+2 
Weapons: None 


*Service shuttle can hold either passengers or cargo. 


EM Spaceport Customs 


use, but that’s because when an inspector runs 
out of room on his desk, he simply uses the one 
next to him). The desks are piled high with 
datadisks, confiscated goods (which are sup- 
posed to bein the supply room), broken gear and 
personal effects. 

5. Supply Room. This room has two cham- 
bers, but there is no door between them. The left 
chamber has supplies for inspectors — blaster 

(AD damage), combat vests (+2 versus 
sters, +1D versus physical attacks), inspec- 
s’ badges (just have a computer imprint infor- 
tion on the badge and insert a photo), helmets 
with comlinks, belts for carrying tools, various 
inspection tools, datapads with all customs regu- 
lations and fines pre-entered, blank data disks, 
blaster power packs and other items that would 
be of use. The right chamber has evidence that 
has been confiscated from smugglers and such: 
deactivated Droids, weapons, datapads and com- 
puters, clothing, bootleg entertainment 
holotapes, computer components, parts for ille- 
gal starship engine modifications and the like. 


Spaceport Customs 


DOWN 


Mos Eisley 


31 


The Spaceport Speeders shop, southeast of 
Docking Bay 94, is an unassuming affair. It offers 
a motley collection of speeders of all shapes, 
sizes, and degrees of repair, and the occasional 
oddball speeder bike or sub-orbital craft. The 
shop itself contains an average assortment of 
tools and equipment. 

Unut Poll, the Arconan proprietor, has a small 
apartment below the shop. He employs a young 
Human mechanic named Geordi Hans and a sales- 
man, Wioslea, who in addition to her sales skills, 
is fluent in many languages. In addition to sales, 
Spaceport Speeders also rents and repairs ve- 
hicles 

Spaceport Speeders has repair contracts with 
five local docking bays for their loading equip- 
ment. In addition, those docking bays refer re- 
pair requests to Unut. 

Geordi Hansis the real star of Spaceport Speed- 
ers. He has his own landspeeder, which is more 
often up on blocks than actually in use. Geordi 
prefers tinkering — either with his own vehicle or 
someone else’s. He is well-known for his me- 
chanical ability, and the locals in the area often 
seek his advice on engines, or pay him to repair 
their speeders 


im Unut Poll makes an art of negotiating with leery customers 


= 
ARS 


IEM Spaceport Speeders 


Speeder Sale! 

The speeders described are samples of the 
kinds of vehicles available for sale by Spaceport 
Speeders; new craft come in and go out over the 
course of afew seasons. In many cases, they have 
been modified by either the original owner or by 


of that model 
The prices listed reflect the price at which 
Unut is prepared to sell. Unut is fairly reasonable 


as far as pricing. The listed price is often í 
lower than what a comparable reseller acros 
town might charge. Many of these speeders were 
seen in Mos Eisley, or in the Lars garage during 
Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope. 


Incom T-16 Skyhopper 
Craft: Incom T-16 Skyhopper 
Type: Skyhopper 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 5.2 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: skyhopper 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: None 
Cover: 3/4 


Mos Eisley 


Cargo Capacity: 25 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-150 km 

Cost: 7,100 credits (used); 300/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 3D 

Move: 450; 1300 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D+1 

Weapons: 

Four Stun Lasers (fire linked) 
Fire Arc: Front 

Skill: Vehicle blasters 

Fire Control: 0D 

Range: 50-300/800/1.5KM 
Damage: 2D* 

*Stun damage only 

Speed and agility are the highlight of this older 
but popular skyhopper. It uses mechanical con- 
trol flaps to brake and change direction, allowing 
it to turn on a coin without slowing. The T-16 is 
equipped with ion afterburners in addition to its 
standard repulsorlift engine, enablingitto achieve 
suborbital flight 

Its vertical panel extends down and forward, 
visually separating the front windshield into two 
halves. This can be unnerving to the inexperi- 
enced pilot, but the heads-up tactical holodisplay 
flawlessly projects a simulation of the obscured 
terrain. 

This particular T-16 was retrofitted with a 
bank of four forward-mounted stun lasers, pow- 
erful enough to stun small animals. When Unut 
purchased it, someone was in the midst of over- 
hauling its engine; Geordi Hans spent the better 
part of two days reassembling the engine and it 
now runs flawlessly. 

Although Unut rarely worries about ownership 
of the vehicles he purchases, the group of Jawas 
who sold it to him didn't seem the type to deal in 
airskimmers. Nevertheless, everything seemed in 
order, and Unut needed new inventory. 


SoroSuub XP-38A Speeder 

Craft: SoroSuub XP-38A 

Type: Landpeeder 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 7.4 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 2 

Cover: 3/4 

Cargo Capacity: 5 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 

Cost: 1,600 credits (used); 45/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 2D 

Move: 35; 100 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D 

Weapons: None 

SoroSuub's XP-38 is the currently the most 
advanced and hottest-selling landspeeder on the 
market. Performance (it is capable of reaching 


Mos Eisley 


320 kilometers per hour), along with a stylish 
reclining seat and aerodynamic design, easily 
keeps it ahead of the competition. Their popular- 
ity has even reached Tatooine: a few have been 
sighted in the streets of Mos Eisley. The XP-38A 
is the precursor to this hot rod, and is far more 
common. The XP-38A ground speederis designed 
more as a utility vehicle than a racer. Technically 
capable of seating three (one uncomfortably), it 
is usually advertised as a two-seater. 

Just like the XP-38, this model sports the now- 
famous autopilot shaped to resemble an 
Astromech Droid. Geordi advised Unut that it no 
longer runs as fast or as well as it did when it was 
new. It also has a broken sensor array which 
Geordi has been unable to fix — much to his 
consternation. 

This heavily-used landspeeder was one of two 
sold to him by a group of eager Jawas. It wasn't 
until a day later, when cleaning out the speeder, 
that Unut found evidence of a previous owner, 
Wedged behind the rear seat was a holocube 
showing a family of three: a boy of about fifteen 
with his parents. The more Unut studied the 
picture, the more he thought he recognized the 
boy. Unut keeps the holocube on the desk in his 
office, having decided to make a hobby out of 
discovering who the speeder used to belong to. 
So far he has had no luck. 


Bespin Motors Void-Spider 
TX-3 Air Taxi 
Craft: Bespin Motors Void-Spider TX-3 
Air Taxi 
Type: Landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Le 7.6 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 1 


Cover: 3/4 
Cargo Capacity: 7 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level-5 meters 


Cost: 12,000 (new); not for rental 

Maneuverability: 3D+1 

Move: 105; 300 KMH 

Body Strength: 1D+1 

Weapons: None 

Bespin Motors. The name signifies attention 
to detail, quality and superior performance, both 
for personal and commercial vehicles. 

The TX-3 is powered by a highly efficient 
Quadrex Corestar repulsorlift engine, and solar 
panels along the exterior of the craft power an 
induction cooling system. 

The unusual bubble domed vehicle looks 
cramped when viewed from afar, but actually 
affords more leg space than the popular XP-38. 


The occupants sit side by side, facingin opposite 
directions. 


Mobquet A-1 Deluxe Floater 
Craft: A-1 Deluxe Floater landspeeder 
Type: Landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 7.1 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: Í 


Cover: 1/2 
Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 


Asking Price: 6,500 credits (new); 150/day 
(rental) 

Maneuverability: 1D+1 

Move: 55; 160 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D 

Weapons: None 

The Deluxe (as it is referred to) is not the 
fastest, sleekest, or most desirable craft avail- 
able. Instead, this rocket-like craft offers two 
things: reliability, and low cost. Intended by 
Mobquet Industries to be a craft that anyone 
could afford, they kept the machine down to the 
basics. The passengers sit one behind the other. 
The exhaust outlets are almost completely out- 
side the main body: it is possible to get burned 
getting out of a Mobquet Deluxe. The inlet ports 
on the front of the vehicle betray its forced-air- 
cooled design. Unfortunately, this system is well 
known for failing to prevent outside odors from 
filtering into the canopy. 

It is lacking numerous luxuries that are stan- 
dard on most other craft: autopilot, entertain- 
ment systems, navigation beacon sensor, and 
on-board computers. The company’s marketing 
efforts have emphasized affordability: despite 
its low cost, the Deluxe still retains a high resale 
value. The body of the Mobquet often disinte- 
grates before the engine quits. 

Unut ordered two of this particular model 
after getting in a used original Mobquet A-1, 
which sold within two days. It appears to have 
been a mistake: these unremarkable models, 
despite an excellent price (reduced twice so far), 
have been here for two seasons. 


Ubrikkian 9000 Z001 
Craft: Ubrikkian 9000 2001 
Type: Landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 6.8 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 2 
Cover: 3/4 
Cargo Capacity: 50 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level-3 meters 


LOCATIONS ooo TAR 
2S War 


Asking Price: 7,500 (rebuilt); 85/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 3D+1 

Move: 55; 160 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D+1 

Weapons: None 

The rounded design of the 9000 reflects the 
species this model was aimed at: the amorphous 
Ugors. It has viewports on all sides. While the 
original model failed to attract very many buyers 
(despite several design features, including a 
unique boarding system: the craft elevated, al- 
lowing the Ugor to flow under and up into the 
craft, which sealed after boarding), Ubrikkian 
Yards was unfazed. The company modified the 
original concept, and released the 9000 Z001. 

The 7001 has a trio of seats around a central 
shaft, presenting an unresolved problem of move- 
ment sickness. TheZ001 is entered by elevatingthe 
chassis up from its base. The occupants simply 
walk under it and allow it to lower around them. 

It possesses incredible maneuverability for a 
landspeeder, something Ubrikkian Yards touts 
when complaints surface about its speed. 


SoroSuub XP-291 Skimmer 

Craft: SoroSuub XP-291 Skimmer 
Type: Landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 6.5 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 3 

Cover: 3/4 

Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 

Asking Price: 3,500 credits (used); 30/day 

(rental) 

Maneuverability: 2D+1 

Move: 80; 230KPH 

Body Strength: 2D+2 

Weapons: None 

To look at, you'd never think this speeder 
would amount to much. Its flat bullet shape masks 
the forced-air-cooled system (with the same odor 
problems as the Mobquet A-1 Deluxe Floater). 
The engines are not manufacturer's original: 
Geordi thinks that the originals were blown, but 
the replacements offer better performance than 
the manufacturer's specs. Unfortunately, the 
condition of the chassis masks the care with 
which the engines were handled, making this a 
hard sell. Unut originally priced t 
4,000 credits. After three seasons, i 
to 3,500. 


Ikas-Adno Starhawk 
Craft: Ikas-Adno Starhawk 2b 
‘Type: Speeder bike 
peeder 
5 meters 


Mos Eisley 


Locations 


Mobquet A-1 
Deluxe Floater 


GoCorp Arunskin 32 
Cargo Skiff 


Bespin Motors Void-Spider 
TX-3 Air Taxi 


Ubrikkian 9000 


Mos Eisley 35 


Skill: Repulsorlift operation: speeder bike 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: None 

Cover: 1/4 

Cargo Capacity: 3 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-12 meters 

Asking Price: 3,600 (used); not for rental 

Maneuverability: 3D+1 

Move: 125; 360 KPH 

Body Strength: 1D+1 

Weapons: None 

Rarely does Unut price a vehicle based on 
market demand instead of guality, but the out-of- 
production Starhawk is not just any bike. It has 
the same mystique afforded to it as other legend- 
ary vehicles of old. Songs are sungand stories are 
told of Starhawks being passed down from par- 
enttochild. At Bestine's annual Starswoop Biker's 
Fair, which is ostensibly for swoops, the 
Starhawks are the highlight of the show. 

The Starhawk is not the fastest speeder bike, 
but it is among the most graceful, and one of the 
most sought-after, especially by collectors. 

Geordi has been carefully eyeing the bike ever 
since it showed up. Unut hasn't admitted this to 
anyone else, but one of the reasons the bike is 
priced so high is to discourage sales. He has 
decided if it does not sell in the next season, he 
will give it to Geordi as a birthday gift. 


GoCorp Arunskin 32 Cargo Skiff 

Craft: GoCorp Arunskin 32 Cargo Skiff 

Type: Skiff 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 17.2 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: skiff 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 14 

Cover: 1/4 

Cargo Capacity: 100 metric tons 

Altitude Range: Ground level-50 meters 

Cost: 9,000 credits (used); 100/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 1D 

Move: 30; 90 KPH 

Body Strength: 1D+2 

Weapons: None 

The Ubrikkian Bantha II Cargo Skitf's work- 
horse reputation was well known. Unfortunately, 
it was also well known for its rather flimsy chas- 
sis. The upstart GoCorp company attempted to 
capitalize on that weakness by offering the 
Arunskin 32: it is equipped with a tougher shell 
without losing the Bantha’s primary selling point 
of cargo capacity. 

This particular cargo skiff was fitted with a 
complete Wengel communications/entertain- 
ment system. This equipment stands out in an 
otherwise utilitarian craft. Unut isn’t quite sure 
what to make of it, and has done little to actually 
push the sale. 


LOCATION A 
zz m mm rs 


Unut And Geordi 


Unut first met Geordi Hans when he was a 
street urchin, repairing speeders outside bars in 
order to get something to eat. The Arconan in- 
stinct for insuring the safety of their young influ- 
enced Unut to look out for the scrawny kid from 
Motesta township, and they now share a warm, 
almost family relationship, with Unut occasion- 
ally referring to Geordi as a “hatchling” — a 
young Arconan. 

Unut has an excellent reputation in the city, 
even if he is stingy with his credits. Unut, as a 
small businessman, has been able to steer clear 
of most of the gang violence and inner conflicts. 

Due to a great tragedy in his past, Unut works 
for the Rebel Alliance, and is its main contact in 
Mos Eisley. However, he is extremely cautious in 
his activities in order to avoid detection. 


Unut Poll 
Template Type: Arcona Refugee 
Loyalty: To himself, Geordi Hans and the 
Rebel Alliance 
Height: 1.6 meters 
Species: Arcona 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Cona 


KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

Alien species 3D, business 2D+2, languages 

4D+2, languages: Basic 5D, streetwise 3D+2, 

planetary systems 2D+1, planetary systems: 

Alderaan 4D+1, planetary systems: Cona 

3D+2, planetary systems: Coruscant 3D, 

planetary systems: Tatooine 4D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 4D 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Bargain 4D+1, con 6D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

Digging 4D 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Computer programming/repair 3D, 

repulsorlift repair 2D 

Special Skills: 

Strength skills: 

Digging. Time to use: One round or longer. 
This skill is used to dig through ground or other 
substances. 

Special Abilities: 

Senses: Arcona have weak long-distance vi- 
sion (add +10to the difficulty when making checks 
requiring vision at distances greater than 15 
meters), but have excellent close range senses, 
because their eyes, their sense of smell and a 
heat-sensing bulb provide detailed information 
on close-range movement, the presence of heat 
sources and such (add +1D to Perception for 


Mos Eisley 


eR LOCATIONS 


WA 


checks closer than 15 meters when using heat, 
smell or movement). 

Thick hide: Arcona have tough, armored hides 
that add +1D to Strength against physical attacks 
(not laser or energy). 

Talons:Arconahavesharp diggingtalons which 
add +1D to climbing, Strength (in combat) or 


: Arcona are easily addicted to 
salt: ifan Arcona consumes salt, he must make a 
Very Difficult willpowernot be addicted and need 
salt at least once a day or suffer -1D to all actions. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 20 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D+2 damage, 
2/4/8), ammonia tablets, clothing, 200 credits, 
datapad (pre-programmed with rental contracts), 
disguise kit. 

Description: An older Arconan, Unut's face is 
careworn and gentle, characteristics which are 
obvious no matter what species the observer 
happens to be. 

Background: Unut Poll is not really who he 
seems to be. The original Unut owned Spaceport 
Speeders — the “new” Unut is a refugee of the 
Galactic Civil War. No one knows his true name or 
identity. 

‘The new Unut is old enough to have witnessed 
the fall of the Republic. After the Empire executed 
his wife and children in the mistaken belief that 
they were involved in a local uprising on Cona, he 
did his best to hide innocent men, women, and 
children left behind during the Empire's purges, 
and to give them homes and new identities. He 
escaped to Tatooine, and took over the company 
from the dying owner. He uses disguise techniques 
to keep his true identity secret. He aids the Rebel- 
lion, no matter how quietly. 

Personality: Unut is a quirky old codger, with 
a heart of gold. He is a gentle persuader and 
relentless charmer. 

Objectives: To remain ignorant of the chang- 
ing galaxy as long as possible. 

‘A Quote: “There are only three areas of legal 
commerce — antiques, used vehicles, and real 
estate — in which prices and terms are set by 
negotiation. Fixed labels and prices don't mean a 
thing. So ... how much do you think the speeder 
is really worth?” 


Geordi Hans 
‘Template Type: Young Mechanic 
Loyalty: To Unut Poll 
Height: 1.6 meters 
Species: Human 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Tatooine 


Age: 17 


DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Streetwise 3D, survival: desert 4D+2 

MECHANICAL 4D 

Repulsorlift operation 6D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Search 3D+1 

STRENGTH 3D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Computer programming/repair 5D+1, Droid 

programming 4D+1, Droid repair 5D+2, 

repulsorlift repair 7D, space transports 

repair 4D+2 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 3 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 2 

Description: Geordi has black hair and alert 
brown eyes. 

id: Geordi's parents abandoned him 
when he was six years old. Forced to fend for 
himself in a rough frontier town, he soon hitched a 
ride to Mos Eisley. Once there, he quickly learned 
about growing up. Having been swindled and 
double-crossed enough times to learn from it, he 
began tinkering with machines. They, at least, 
never lied. He spent his formative years repairing 
speeders and avoiding truant officers. Eventually 
he met Unut Poll, akindly Arconan whotreated him 
well. Judging from the way that Unut has been 
talking lately (about Geordi taking over the busi- 
ness), Geordi fears that he must soon choose 
between taking over Unut's business or following 
his own path out among the stars. 

Objectives: To get that extra bit of perfor- 
mance out of a vehicle. 

A Quote: “Yeah, but see right here? The 
transcore gear is stripped. I'mafraid we'll have to 
take this entire engine apart.” 


Wioslea 
Template Type: Vuvria Salesperson 
Loyalty: To herself 
Height: 1.9 meters 
Species: Vuvria 
Sex: Female 
Homeworld: Unknown 


Dodge 4D+1, pick pocket 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D+2, alien species: Humans 
6D, business 3D+2, cultures 4D+1, languages 
5D+1, languages: Aqualish 6D, languages: 
Arcona 5D+2, languages: Vregg (Gamorrean 
dialect) 7D, languages: Huttese 7D, lan- 
guages: Rodian 6D+1, languages: Sullustan 
7D, planetary systems 4D, streetwise 5D, 


Mos Eisley 


37 


John Paul Lora 


streetwise: Tatooine 6D+2, value 4D, value: 

landspeeders 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 3D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 5D, con 4D+2, gambling 4D+2, 

persuasion 4D+2 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0 

Equipment: Long cloak, comlink, datapad, 200 
credits 

Description: A tall Vuvria, with an almost comi- 
cal face, Wioslea is a disarming personality: her 
physical appearance greatly relaxes customers, 
allowing her to cleverly drive hard bargains. 

Background: No one knows where the Vuvria 
comes from, and she won't talk about it. She had 
been on Tatooine for a few months before she 
approached Unut for a job, and she has served 
well since then. Unfortunately, she has gotten 
into debt to one of Jabba's con man cronies (for 
over 1000 credits!) and thus she is quietly spying 
for the crime lor 

Personality: Friendly, but intensely private. 
She doesn't tell anyone any more about herself 
than she has to. 

Objectives: To pay off her debts, and then look 
to relocate to another planet. 

Quote: “4,000 credits ... only 4,000. You look 
like you could use a break, kid. Sold.” 


The Farns 
and his buddies, Jeff Pill and 


Geordi Han: 
Franklin “Shorty” Scott, are the sole members of 
a “swoop” gang called the Farns. Actually, they 
are swoop gang wannabes, since only Franklin 
has a bike, and it is a speeder bike, not a swoop. 

The fourth quasi-member of their group is the 
Droid Ay-BeeSix (A-B6) seen hanging 
around asking questions and generally getting in 
the way. The gang puts up with her, mostly 
because she will do almost anything and go 
almost anywhere for them. 

The group is occasionally thoughtless when it 
comes to the Droid: Fi 
BeeSix to go into the M 


right, but wa 
very angry ( nce putting her back 
together, they've treated her better. 

When Second Twilight approaches, they can 
usually be seen on the outskirts of town, tinker- 
ing with Geordi's speeder and Franklin's heavily 
modified Ikas-Adno Starhawk. 

This group is honest and unthreatening — 
they would rather race than wreak havoc. Their 
true dream is to escape Mos Eisley, but Jeff is 
unmotivated, Franklin is scared, and Geordi has 
realized that Unut Poll has dreams of eventually 
handing over the shop to him. For now, the locals 
must remain ready to jump out of the way when 
the “gang” tears through the streets at First 
Twilight, trying to beat their own record for 
getting out of town. 


Mos Eisley 


Locations. 


AR 
ARST 


EM Lups General Store 


This establishment is actually named Lup's 
Wares and Supplies, but most everyone knows it 
as "Lup's General Store.” Kal Lup and her hus- 
band Tar run the store, and despite their fierce, 
wolf-like appearance, they are both friendly and 
helpful. 

The store contains provisions, supplies, and a 
smattering of machinery. The main display room 
(about eight by five meters) has the front door on 
the south wall; opposite it is a row of countertops 
with barstools, with amonitorat each seat. These 
are touch-screen activated, allowing the pro- 
spective patron to browse the catalog of avail- 
able merchandise. Out of the fifteen monitors, six 
are still functioning (one in black and white). 
There are three metal doors on the wall behind 
the counter, 

Mounted on the left wall is a block of twelve 
large monitors, advertising the day's specials 
and the latest merchandise. All of these still 
work, but the sound fades in and out. Kal has 
been meaning to fix it but can never find the time. 

The first of the doors leads to a large, well-lit 
bathroom, The mirror above the rinsing station 
can slide open. Here is where most illegal trans- 
actions are conducted between the Lups and 
their customers. 


The second door leads to a pair of rear offices 
and a meeting room. This is where customers 
with specific (read: illegal) requests can haggle in 
private. 

The final door is the warehouse access portal, 
where three Droids pack merchandise for cus- 
tomers. 

The Lups charge reasonable prices and stock 
agood variety of foodstuffs and equipment, charg- 
ing anywhere from 90 to 110% of the prices listed 
on page 161 of the Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition rulebook; they charge 120% 
of market value for medical equipment and weap- 
onry. Using the availability codes on page 161 
will help establish Mos Eisley as an out-of-the 
way hole in the wall: thus, all code one products 
(“readily available”) can be found in the general 
store, most code two products (“large cities and 
spaceports") are available or can be ordered, but 
specialized or rare products (codes three and 
four) simply cannot be had here. 

The Lups have been experiencing some trouble 
with Jabba lately. When business low, he still 
expects the same protection payments, while the 
Lups would prefer a sum targeted to their weekly 
gross receipts. In fact, they have demonstrated 
that the payment amount would actually increase 
under their system when business was good. But 
Jabba, concerned that the thugs he uses to pick 
up the payments might find the temptation to 
start skimming the fluctuating take to be over- 
whelming, has so far declined the offer. 

The Lups are congenial lupines, but tend to 
remember any slights and perceived rudeness. 
They do not like anyone poking about in their 
business. They have an old blaster carbine (4D+2 
damage, 3/20/150) hidden behind the counter. 


The Lups 
Height: 1.8 meters 
Species: Shistavanen Wolfman 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Dodge 4D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Business 5D+2, streetwise 6D, value 5D 
MECHANICAL 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 4D+2 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 3D+1 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Point 
Character Poin! 


40 


Mos Eisley 


-WA 


Locations 


IEM Market Place: Geps Grill 


and Spaceport Express 


Less a group of established businesses, and 
more of a Gundark-flea market, Market Place is 
the spot where free enterprise agro farmers come 
to sell their produce and fledgling businesses go 
to start trade. 

The area was nothing more than a sandy lot 
when the farmers began setting up their tents 
here. Over the years, the market place has thrived, 
and no one bothers it even though no one has 
ever secured trade permits or any other official 
documentation. 

The tents mark off territory and provide pro- 
tection from the searing suns — they have solar 
energy collectors, which power cooling genera- 
tors, grill units or any other portable machinery. 
The tents offer vegetables and meat, harvested 
from underground agrofarms, or collected from 
hunters out on the Dune Sea. Some also sell 
trinkets, inexpensive tools, homespun clothing 
or other individually crafted or cheap items. 


Gep's Grill 

Atypical stall is the one owned by Fillin Ta and 
Norun Gep, situated just behind Lup's General 
Store. Meeting in the same jail cell when they 
were street urchins, they have since become 
friends. The two young Whiphids have been 
makinga good living by rendezvousing with hunt- 
ers on the outskirts of the city and buying Bantha 
and Dewback meat from them. They do not ques- 
tion the origin of the meat, and have sometimes 
needed to cut off a brand or two which the 
careless hunters left on the haunches. 

On those off-weeks where the hunters have 
had no luck, Fillin and Norun have had no misgiv- 
ings about looting local Bantha and Dewback 
stables, using pilfering skills they picked up by 
necessity as children on the streets of Mos Eisley. 

Once hauled to the tent and prepared, the 
Whiphids grill the meat throughout the day. Many 
local workers stop by during the day to sample 
their wares. The menuis simple, but adequate for 
quick meals. 


Welcome To Gep’s Grill! 


TODAY'S SPECIALS 
Bantha Burger 5c 
Bantha Platter __ _2.0c 
(comes with al the finís and salamander sticks) 
Dewback Ribs (6 pack]__2.5C 
Ribs (10 packļ —4.0c 


The Whiphids also engage in more than grill- 
ing food — old habits die hard, and smuggling is 
Mos Eisley's business after all. They perform 
small scale courier runs of weapons, spice and 
other forms of contraband for various custom- 
ers. While the boys haven't gotten into trouble 
yet, they have been quite indiscreet, crossing 
Jabba without knowing it. 


Spaceport Express 

Norun has recently allied with one of the local 
messenger services, Spaceport Express (a branch 
office is located immediately behind Gep's Grill). 
For a piece of the action, the messenger service 
accepts orders and drops them off at the tent. 
Omon Gantum, the Quarren who runs Spaceport 
Express, was more than happy to add to his 
already ample income. 

Spaceport Express started off handling only 
legal goods: jewels, medicine, goods and informa- 
tion. After teaming up with the Whiphids, business 
has blossomed. Fillin and Norun, while on runs out 
of town for meat, buy stolen equipment or meat 
stuffed with contraband — the messenger service 
handles all inquiries and payments. 

In fact, Omon Gantum is being so helpful be- 
cause he is selling a list of the contraband to 
Valarian at the Lucky Despot. She reviews the 
deliveries and occasionally spots something 
worth looking into. This usually results in her 
sending a representative to purchase the stolen 
goods from the ultimate recipient or, less likely, 
directing a thug to waylay the messenger. So far 
Fillin and Norun are unaware of the duplicity. 


oe aaaaaaaaasssssssssssħĂ— 


Mos Eisley 


41 


AR— 
ARST 


| TODAYS / BANTHABURGERS 
SPECIAL / DEWBACK RIBS 


ae Mos Eisley 


WA 


KEM Docking Bay 86 


Very similar to the now infamous Docking Bay 
94, “old 86" is a round pit gouged in the soil. It is 
slightly smaller in landing space than most other 
docking bays, and the vast majority of its busi- 
hess consists of small shuttles and personal trans- 
ports (scout ships and the like). 

Old 86 has an absentee owner, Trepler 
Darklighter, who spends most of his time away 
on resort worlds (no one knows where he has 


IEM Docking 


Directly across the street from Docking Bay 
86, and within one block's walk of the famous 
Mos Eisley Cantina, Docking Bay 87 is among the 
top ten favorite bays of smugglers and merchants 
in this city. The bay is of the same age as the 
others in the central portion of the city, but its 
owners have continually modernized the facility 
— currently, the landing bay is at ground level, 
withadouble blast door and forcefield that opens 
directly into the street. The bay charges 30 cred- 
its per day, and restocking and maintenance 
charges are charged at the same rate as Docking 
Bay 94. Unofficially, the bay also charges aflat fee 
of 25 credits to avoid “bureaucratic hassles” (i.e., 
cargo inspections) — if the pilot in question 
doesn't pay the fee, there is aone in three chance 
that his ship will be searched; if the fee is paid, 
the ship will not be searched barring very un- 
usual circumstances. Needless to say, a good 


gotten his wealth, but since heisalocal boy —his 
family is from Anchorhead — many assume it is 
from the smuggling trade). The bay is run by an 
ill tempered administrative Droid named BX-9T. 
Its humanoid, blue and red form is easily recog- 
nized in the spaceport city, and most people 
know enough not to bother with the Droid unless 
they have to. Rates for the bay are 35 credits per 
day 


Bay 87 


portion of that 25 credits is diverted to the cus- 
toms officials of Mos Eisley. 

The bay has a larger landing area than aver- 
age, enabling it to handle slightly larger ships 
(and with the size of the bays in Mos Eisley, every 
square meter counts). The bay is owned by a 
cheerful Ishi Tib (see Galaxy Guide 4: Alien Rac 
named Dr'xureretue (although he insists that 
people call him “Drue” since most people can't 
pronounce his name). He is easy going, but un- 
compromising when it comes to fees and busi- 
ness practices; however, he will warn newcom- 
ers about how business is done in Mos Eisley, so 
he isa good source of information and gossip. He 
has two common labor Droids that unload and 
load cargo, and Dom Antyll from location 21, 
“Docking Bay 92" performs any necessary main- 
tenance and repair work. 


IEM Mos Eisley Inn 


This run-down building has the bare necessi- 
ties and little else. For 10 credits a day (officially; 
the clerks try to haggle for more and pocket the 
excess), a customer gets a place to sleep, a 
shower, and access to public communicators. 
Those who are willing to pay the extra few credits 
get the subterranean rooms, which are dark and 
cramped, but cool; those who are tough bargain- 
ers often get stuck with the rooms on the upper 
floor, which are almost unbearably warm. 


Theinnhasacentral lobby withatransparisteel 
canopy and several imported trees. The clerk is 
a grumpy Human local, but for those who give a 
few extra credits he will give extra courtesy. The 
clerk knows how to get ahold of any number of 
underworld contacts, and can arrange escorts or 
any number of other services for additional tips. 
There are several beat-up servant Droids that are 
supposed to take luggage to guests’ rooms, but 
they are seldom functioning. 


Mos Eisley 43 


Locations. 


AR 
ARST 


EM Tatooine Militia 


This building houses Mos Eisley's militia, and 
in recent times, has become the permanent base 
of any stormtroopers stationed in the city. The 
militia used to have four full-time members, but 
they have been transferred to the newly formed 
police force. Now, however, the militia can call 
on up to 50 individuals to take up arms and put 
down Tusken Raider attacks or other potentially 
dangerous situations. In times of high crisis in 
the city, militiamen are also asked to perform 
patrol duties, but the men have been known to 
actively avoid action if at all possible. If they do 
become involved, the militiamen are likely just to 
arrest any visitors and allow the locals to escape 
punishment — after all, no one wants to arrest 
their neighbors. As it stands now, the militiamen 
are seldom called upon for duty. 

The building has a large weapons vault (Mod- 
erate security total to pick the lock; walls and 
door have a Strength of 7D). There are about 25 
blast vests, 50 blast helmets, 50 blaster carbines, 
several dozen grenades, a score of stun batons, 
spare power packs and three E-web blasters in 
the vault. 


There is always at least one militiaman on 
guard duty, and he can raise the alarm with his 
comlink. The militia uses location “10, Dewback 
Stables” to store its vehicles. 


Mos Eisley Militiaman 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 4D, dodge 5D, melee combat 3D+2, 

melee parry 3D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Intimidation 3D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 3D+1, repulsorlift operation 

3D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-5 

Equipment: Blaster carbine (5D damage, 3-25/ 
50/250), stun baton (5D stun damage), blast vest 
(+2 to energy, +1D to physical attacks), blast 
helmet (+2 to energy, +1D to physical attacks), 
comlink 


EIS Dewback Stables 


Almost as old as the city itself, these dewback 
stables hark back to a time when people couldn't 
easily afford repulsorlift vehicles and had to 
stable their dewbacks and banthas while visiting 
town. Now, the building has been turned over to 
Mos Eisley's militia, and new facilities have been 
installed to allow the building to be used as a 
garage. 

A heavy-duty lock (Difficult security total to 
pick) has been installed on double blast doors 
(Strength 4D+1). Inside, the three armored 
landspeeders at the militia's disposal have been 
garaged, with a simple R3 unit providing mainte- 
nance on them. The landspeeders are normally 
used only on maneuvers, which occur four times 
ayear. Most often “maneuvers” are just an elabo- 
rate excuse for the militiamen to go womp rat 
hunting, rather than a military exercise. The 
militia also has half a dozen patrol scooters, 
which are used for inner city patrol by both the 
militia and the police. 

With the addition of a full-fledged stormtrooper 
garrison, they have begun storing their speeder 
bikes in the garage area, making it fairly cramped. 


The R3 began loudly complaining about the lack 
of proper maintenance space until Prefect 
Talmont threatened to have its memory wiped 
and sold off to Jawas. 


Armored Landspeeders 

Craft: Modified Ikas-Adno Sunrunner zX 

landspeeder 
‘Type: Armored landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: Í 
Passengers: 1, plus gunner 
Cover: 1/2 
Length: 6.2 meters 
Cargo Capacity: 40 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level - 2 meters 
Cost: 14,950 credits 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Move: 105; 300 KMH 
Body Strength: 2D 
Weapons: 

Laser Cannon 

Fire Arc: Turret 


aaas 


44 


Mos Eisley 


es LOCATIONS 
=m AR 


Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control: 2D 
Range: 3-25/100/250 
Damage: 4D 


Patrol Scooters 
Craft: Menstar Motors 22 Patrol Scooter 
Type: Patrol scooter 
Scale: Character 


Cover: 1/4 


KIM Regional 


Cargo Capacity: 5 kilograms 

Length: 2.1 meters 

Altitude Range: Ground level - 4 meters 

Cost: 5,420 credits 

Maneuverability: 1D+1 

Move: 25; 70 KMH 

Body Strength: 4D 

The patrol scooter is perfect for low-speed, 
high-visibility patrols through the twisting, nar- 
row streets of the city. They aren't designed for 
high-speed pursuit against other vehicles, but 
are perfect for keeping up with suspects fleeing 
on foot. 


Government Offices 


Tatooine's administration is handled from this 
cramped building by Prefect Talmont (Governor 
Aryon is only bothered when absolutely neces- 
sary). This office handles land deeds, weapon 
licenses, Mos Eisley resident IDs (each town 
issues its own form of ID card), settlement char- 
ters, taxation and court appearances (there are 
two small courtrooms in back corners of the 
building, and court is held once per week at 
night). 

Prefect Talmont is often in his office, which 
was once a spacious, if run-down, room. How- 


ever, it is has become cramped due to a prepon- 
derance of datadisks and personal effects. lt also 
has a desk, a computer, several chairs, an ove 
head fan (which never works) and a pair of lights 
near the ceiling. The office hasn't been cleaned in 
several years. 

Commonly encountered personnel include 
three clerks, behind desks and computers, who 
are responsible for recording all vital informa- 
tion. There are no guards here unless there has 
been a disturbance of some kind in the city that 
requires official attention 


KEM Power Station 


This station provides power to speeders, 
Droids and other items of machinery. As such, it 
is a place where merchants, clerks, farmers and 
others meet and discuss business, politics, the 
weather (or lack thereof) or anything else that 
springs to mind. This business is busy in the 
early morning or late afternoon, as it is a gather- 
ing place for the “common” people of Mos Eisley 
who must work daytime hours. Just by hanging 


out for a few minutes, characters are likely to 
hear a number of different rumors (all with vary- 
ing degrees of truth). The station is run by an 
unenthusiastic power Droid named 4LB who 
seems to care little for the comings and goings of 
his customers. A speeder recharge runs about 15 
credits; Droids require only 3-4 credits worth of 
power. 


EES Jabbas Townhouse 


Jabba the Hutt's influence in the affairs of 
Tatooine is perhaps felt most at his small, almost 
humble townhouse, in the heart of Mos Eisley. 
The Hutt has found it convenient to direct many 
of his operations through his workers at the 
townhouse, even ifthe Bloated Oneseldom comes 


Mos Eisley 


here personally. The townhouse, in addition toa 
local center of operations, also houses many 
guests who cometo Tatooine to do business with 
the Hutt. Dwarfed by the Mos Eisley Inn, which 
stands alongside it, Jabba's Townhouse is a con- 
verted blockhouse. It is here that he holds court 


John Paul Lona 


for only one week or so per season, and only for 
those business associates who he feels are wor- 
thy of his time. 

At first, the building seems to be lacking the 
kind of security one would expect of a crime 
lord's building. However, one must also bear in 
mind that retribution from the Hutt is discour- 
agement enough for criminals. 

Jabbaemploys adozenservants and two dozen 
guards here; two or three of the guards are 
disguised as loiterers and beggars stationed in 
the narrow alley across the street from Jabba's 
front door. These guards keep tabs on who comes 
calling, as well as how long they stay. 

All doors are heavily reinforced durasteel 
(Strength 5D), and the walls themselves have 
been reinforced against explosives (Strength 3D). 
Every portal in the building is covered by secu- 
rity cameras hidden in the doorjambs (which 
transmit to the monitoring station), along with 
motion detector “fields,” which trip when any- 


Jabbas Townhouse 


LOCATIONS eee TAR 
WAR“ 


thing passes through a window or door. 

Every room in Jabba's Townhouseis wired for 
sound. The recordings are often played back for 
theamusementoftheemployees, especially ones 
detailing guests’ more private moments. 


Typical Guard 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Blaster 4D+2, dodge 3D, melee combat 3D+2, 

melee parry 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D, 3-12/25/50), 
vibroblade (STR+2D), blast vest (+2 from energy 
attacks, +1D from physical attacks), comlink 

Description: Jabba's guards are Human and 
alien vermin (as one might expect), but by the 
time they have completed Jabba's training pro- 
gram, they are loyal vermin. They dress in their 
own clothing, for a rather mot- 
ley appearance, but they are 
impatient and eager for a 
scrap. 

1. Main Entrance: This isthe 
main entrance to the 
townhouse, and non-employ- 
ees must always use this en- 
trance. Theoutsideis an intimi- 
datingand obviouslyreinforced 
blast door, with a sole sensor 
(just like the one used at the 
entrance to Jabba's palace, as 
seen in Return of the Jedi). 

Inside, the door is attended 
at all times by four of Jabba's 
more trusted guards. The main 
entrance can be operated only 
from the inside, and only upon 
a voice command from Jabba 
or his guards, The audience 
chamber portal at the end of 
thecorridor can beopenedonly 
on electronic command issued 
from Jabba's power sled. 

Thereis a hidden video sen- 
sor along the right wall that 
leads to Jabba's Monitoring 
Station. 

2. Guest Quarters (4): Each 
of these rooms is luxuriously 
appointed (by Tatooine stan- 
dards, anyway). These serve 
as rooms for those visiting 
crime syndicate dignitaries 
who have earned a personal 
meeting with the Hutt. Each 
room has a video communica- 


Mos Eisley 


tor which has a maximum range of near-orbit 
(they are bugged, of course), a personal datapad 
for the guest's use (which copies anything typed 
into it into a second, permanent storage cell in 
the basement for later retrieval and examina- 
tion). Each door has a combination lock (Moder- 
ate security difficulty to pick). 

Jabba has been known to make these suites 
available from time to time to friends, acquain- 
tances, and those who are in Mos Eisley doing his 
bidding. 

3. Lounge: This is the main recreational area 
for Jabba's guests and the guards on duty. There 
are holovids, holochess, and other games of 
amusement available. This area is off-limits to 
employees whenever guests are in residence. 

4. Employee Entrance And Storage: A sturdy 
blast door with a combination lock with a Diffi- 
cult security difficulty enters into a hall where 


gear can easily be stowed. Armor and weapons 
are supposed to be left here, but may be locked 
up for safekeeping, if requested. This entrance is 
only used by employees. 

5. Dining Room: Able to accommodate many 
beings, the dining room is often an impromptu 
meeting room and card-playing area. 

6. Kitchen: Jabba's tastes are known to be... 
different. This well-stocked kitchen and its mas- 
ter chef are eager and willing to cater to the 
Hutt's every whim. From Womp Rat stew to raw 
Dewback eggs, this kitchen can prepare it 

7. Bathrooms: Clean, with a hidden entrance 
to the Monitoring Station (Difficult search roll to 
find). 

8. Monitoring Station: This station is located 
in the interior of Jabba’s place to provide ad- 
equate shielding from outside jamming or other 
interference (or electronic eavesdropping on 
Jabba's doings). This room is accessible only 
from the bathrooms. 

9. Conference Room (2): These blast-shielded 
rooms are soundproofed and ray-shielded. They 
are also equipped with hidden video sensors (in 
addition to the standard audio sensors). 

These rooms are used to hammer out deals 
when Jabba isn't present, and is also where the 
day's take from local merchants is counted. Each 
conference room has a hidden door (Difficult 
search to find, Moderate security total to pick the 
lock), which opens toa stairwell that leads to the 
basement vaults. 

10. Audience Chamber: When Jabba deigns 
to visit the city, this is where he resides. The dais 
was specially constructed to fit his power sled. 
The room provides enough space for contract 
negotiation, entertainment (should Jabba desire 
a performance band) or anything else the Hutt 
might want. If Jabba isn’t here, Bib Fortuna (a 
Twi'lek), Bidlo Kwerve (a Corellian pirate) or one 
of Jabba's other lieutenants is often running 
things, while Akkik the Jawa and Gorrt the 
Gamorrean are serving as minions. 

When Jabba desires private conversations, a 
pair of heavy blast doors (Strength 7D) can be 
rolled into place, cutting off the rest of the build- 
ing. The outer door is operated only from Jabba's 
sled (Very Difficult security roll to pick). 

Once moored in place, Jabba's sled can func- 
tionas an elevator, able to descend into the cellar 
of the building, where he can transact cash deals 
and oversee prisoner transfers as desired. 

The Bloated One also has a sophisticated 
weapon-detecting Droid stationed in his audi- 
ence chamber. It serves to warn the Hutt of any 
firearms, explosives, or other incendiaries which 
might conceivably be hidden on a being's per- 
son, or in a shipment (Droid has search at 8D to 
detect weapons in open view; with exotic infra- 


Mos Eisley 


LTR en LOCATIONS 
SNAR | _ Z——, ZW WW] — 


red sensors and the like, it has a search of 5D to 
detect hidden weapons). The Droid has, on occa- 
sion, failed to detect more exotic weapons, as 
well as weapons which seemed to be tools. 

A massive wire mesh net is suspended near 
the domed ceiling, for the use of Jabba's very 
special guests. Roosting there are four Kayven 
Whistlers (carnivores who resemble a cross be- 
tween a monkey and a bat and who have vora- 
cious appetites). The species is used to nesting 
high in the tall trees of their native planet of 
Kayven, and no longer descend to the forest 
floor. Jabba has used this trait to his advantage. 

When the Hutt is displeased, a cage descends 
to the audience chamber floor, where it is filled. 
It then rises back up past the mesh, and the door 
opens. The victimis free to roam along the topside 
of the wire mesh — it is too narrow to allow a 
typical Human to drop down through. 

The victim remains trapped topside until the 
Whistlers are hungry, which is usually about 
twice a week. There is seldom anything to re- 
move after the Whistlers are done feasting. 

Although the Whistlers have nowhere near 
the intimidation capability that Jabba's Rancor is 
rumored to possess, they are nevertheless effec- 
tive, Many deals have been negotiated greatly in 
favor of Jabba because his negotiator became 
unnerved at the pleas and cries of trapped vic- 
tims who were awaiting the awakening of the 
Whistlers. 


Kayven Whistler 

DEXTERITY 4D 
Brawling parry 6D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 6D 
Move: 15 
Size: | meter long 
Attacks: 

Razored Teeth: 6D damage. 


Jabba the Hutt 
Template Type: Hutt Crime Lord 
Loyalty: To himself 
Size: 3.9 meters long 
Species: Hutt 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Nal Hutta 
Age: Unknown 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Alien species 5D, bureaucracy 7D, bureau- 
cracy: Tatooine government 9D+1, business 
6D+1, cultures 4D+2, intimidation 7D, lan- 
guages 4D, law enforcement 4D+1, law 
enforcement: Tatooine 9D, streetwise 9D, 
streetwise: Jabba's organization 11D 
MECHANICAL 3D 


PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 8D, command 8D, con 7D+1, gam- 

bling 7D+2, persuasion 7D+2 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 6D, lifting 6D, stamina 7D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Special Abilities: 

Force Resistance: Hutts have an innate defense 
against Force-based mind manipulation techniques; 
they roll double their Perception dice to resist such 
attacks. Hutts cannot learn Force skills. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 5 

Dark Side Points: 6 

Character Points: 26 

Move: 2 

Description: A hairless, bloated slug with 
quick, snakelike eyes, fetid breath, and aslobber- 
ing mouth. 

Background: Jabba the Hutt is among the 
most famous, but not necessarily the most pow- 
erful, of the Hutt crime lords. He is crediting with 
forcing the various Hutt crime families to band 
together to form an unstoppable organization, 
His pudgy hand is in everything from spice run- 
ning to extortion to protection rackets stretching 
halfway across the galaxy. 

Personality: Bloodthirsty, ruthless, and alto- 
gether foul, with no redeeming qualities. 

Objectives: To remain in his position as numero 
uno in the region’s crime syndicate. 

A Quote: “Bo shudda." 


Akkik 
Template Type: Jawa Henchman 
Loyalty: To Jabba the Hutt 
Height: 1.3 meters 
Species: Jawa 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Tatooine 
Age: Unknown 
DEXTERITY 2D 


Dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Streetwise 5D 

MECHANICAL 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Con 5D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Droid programming 5D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 3 

Move: 8 

Description: Short, smelly, and covered com- 
pletely by a heavy, hooded cloak. 

Background: Mousey, even for a Jawa, Akkik 


Mos Eisley 


49 


LOCATIONS aS TAF 
LE. 


has always had a reputation for being a nasty 
little piece of vermin. His exploits in and around 
Mos Eisley soon earned him the respect of one of 
Jabba's guards, who took it upon himself to 
propose that Akkik join the guards. Jabba agreed, 
and fired him on the spot to make room for Akkik. 

Personality: Akkikis covetous, nasty, tricky, a 
coward, and talks a lot. Nobody can understand 
him (and Akkikis not his real name, anyway), but 
that doesn't bother him a bit. 

Objectives: To work for Jabba as longas Jabba 
continues to feed him. 

A Quote: "Mop-lou dink dink hee, hee.” 


Gorrt 
Template Type: Gamorrean Goon 
Loyalty: To Jabba the Hutt 
Height: 1.7 meters 
Species: Gamorrean 
‘Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Gamorr 


Melee combat 4D+2, melee combat: vibroaxe 
6D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Intimidation 5D+1 

MECHANICAL 2D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

STRENGTH 4D+1 


ARST 


Brawling 6D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 1 

Move: 9 

Equipment: Vibroaxe (STR+3D+1 damage) 

Description: This Gamorrean is green-skinned, 
with a pig-like snout, small horns and tusks, and 
powerful muscles. 

Background: Gorrt's innate skill as an en- 
forcer was not always recognized out in Jabba's 
palace beyond the Jundland Wastes. After a brief 
run-in with an uncooperative store owner, how- 
ever, Gorrt's “finesse” and skill were rewarded 
with a permanent post in Mos Eisley. 

Personality: Gorrt tends to be protective of 
Akkik, but generally loves to beat on anything 
that is smaller than him. 

Objectives: To be allowed to beat on other, 
weaker beings as much as he wants. 

A Quote: "Grunt!" 

The Hutt also owns the rectangular building 
behind the Townhouse, which serves both as 
barracks for his guards and as a garage. lt has 
room for a small sail barge, an assortment of 
speeders, and posts along the rear to tie up a 
dozen Dewbacks or Banthas. 


Street Corner 
Preacher/Wreckage 


Mos Eisley was built around the wreckage of 
the colony ship Dowager Queen; what little re- 
mains of the ancient ship is still on display in the 
heart of the city. As the city grew and expanded, 
the central power and water distribution plant 
came to be recognized asthe heart of the city, but 
the original blockhouses that stand around the 
wreckage attest to its age. 

As the site of the wreckage is city property, 
vagrants, hustlers and street preachers of all 
kinds have taken to staying in the vicinity of the 
area. Jawas gather shade under the wreckage, 
con men set up impromptu card trick tables as 
night and cooler temperatures come, and preach- 
ers find a space in the shade of a building and 


exhort the benefits of their religion. The most 
common preachers are Dim-U monks from a 
distant community called Oasis, who preach that 
Banthas are nearly divine creatures and that 
they present a perfect society that the residents 
of Tatooine should emulate. 

Here, in the heart of the old section of the city, 
there is constant bustle and hustle. Jawas scam- 
per about examining Droids and vehicles, aliens 
and spacers of all description come and go, and 
Mos Eisley's residents struggle for daily survival. 
There arenumerous traders who wander through, 
and if something is going on in the city, people 
will be in this area discussing the happenings. 


50 


Mos Eisley 


Ti 
"WA! 


KCN Mos Eisley Cantina 


Located in the heart of the city is the infamous 
Mos Eisley Cantina. The building hosting the 
cantina was one of Tatooine's first blockhouses, 
designed as a shelter against Tusken Raider at- 
tacks. The assaults on the city never material- 
ized, and the building became an armory for the 
local militia. As Mos Eisley grew, the armory was 
moved, and the cantina went up for sale. Over the 
years it has undergone extensive modification 
and numerous owners. 

Thecurrent owner, a Wookiee named Chalmun, 
bought the building with gambling profits made 
while swindling visitors on Ord Mantell. Its cen- 
tral location has beena boon tosmugglers, bounty 
hunters and others with business deals that must 
be conducted quickly. Now, the cantina is the 
place to meet freighter pilots who handle special 
cargo — anything contraband or illegal, from 
weapons, to spice, to Droids is fair game on the 
Cantina open-market “trading floor.” 


Mos Eisley 


Wuher, the bartender, is a non-communica- 
tive, ill-tempered local but he knows how to keep 
his mouth shut. The patrons are a fairly boister- 
ous lot who are used to the rough nature of the 
city; newcomers to the cantina are often given a 
hard time, but if they return after their initial 
visit, they are often tolerated. 

The cantina has no actual gambling tables (or 
permits), but there are always a half-dozen card 
games and other games of chance being played 
around the room. The cantina pays Jabba the 
Hutt for protection, and has very little trouble 
from the crime lord. The cantina is open all day 
and all night, every day of the year, even during 
official holidays. 

1. Entrance And Droid Detector: Entering 
from the bright glare of the sands to the elevated 
entranceway allows the bar patrons to check out 
the newcomers while they are still adjusting to 
the dim light. The new Droid detector is up and 


N 


Zi: 


x 


> 


‚Locations 


51 


Locations 


R— 
ARST 


52 Mos Eisley 


STi 
"WA! 


running. Chalmun hates Droids, and won't toler- 
ate them in his building. 

The couches in this spot are for patrons wait- 
ing or rides, although sometimes homeless Jawas 
make use of them (until they are shooed off). 

2. Booth (7): The booths in the cantina vary in 
size, shape, and capacity, in order to accommo- 
date large groups as well as intimate meetings. 
To handle the increasingly common overflow 
crowds, Chalmun added some free-standing 
tables in the bar area. The booths can handle 
about 40 patrons; busy times (which can occur 
any time of day or night) may find over 100 
individuals congregating in the cantina. 

3. Bandstand: Chalmun, after much coaxing 
from his employees, decided to add a live band, 
if only to discourage violence in the bar. He 
situated the bandstand close to the bar so that 
the bartender could make sure that the band was 
earning its keep. Currently, the seven-piece 
semble led by bandmaster Figrin “Fiery Figri 
Da'n is entertaining the natives. The band has 
igned another two-season contract with the 


4. Back Hallway: This rear entrance to the bar 
is left unlocked, allowing those with the knowl- 
edge and the need a way to escape. The three 
restrooms can be found at the bottom of the 
stairs. The cellar is also where the foodstuffs, 


Mos Eisley 


liquor, and ingredients for mixers are kept — in 
what was once a walk-in freezer. (The door, lock, 
and walls have a Strength of 4D.) 

There are at least three ways to get to the 
basement: the back stairs, the trapdoor in the 
office, and the access shaft in the power room. 

5. Office: Chalmun's office is a small, spartan 
affair. The office is separated from the bar by 
both a door and a simple curtained wall. There is 
a trapdoor here, leading to a ladder that de- 
scends to the basement. Chalmun actually keeps 
his daily receipts in the cellar, in a crate marked 
“explosives.” 

6. Bar: The high-tech bar is capable of synthe- 
sizing virtually any drink known in this sector of 
the galaxy. The mixing computer knows 16,000 
drinks, but of course the cantina does not stock 
proper ingredients for all of the variations. 

The bar can comfortably handle twenty to 
thirty beings standing at the bar. It also contains 
a storage hatch in the floor leading to a shallow 
compartment, with enough room to hold the 
bartender's and band's valuables while they are 
on-duty and performing, respectively. 

7. Power Room: The power room holds a 
cranky Queblux Power Train, which has seen 
better days. It is wired to the fusion generator in 
the basement. It powers the lights, climate con- 
trol, the bar computer, and the mixing machines. 


Locations, 


Chalmun 


Loyalty: To himself 
Height: 2.0 meters 
Species: Wookiee 
Sex: Male 


Age: 157 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 


KNOWLEDGE 2D 


Hi P MECHANICAL 2D 
Beast riding 4D+1 
H? PERCEPTION 2D+1 
$ Bargain 4D+1, command 5D 
STRENGTH 4D 

Brawling 6D 

TECHNICAL 1D+1 

Special Abilities: 


Berserker Rage: +2D to Strength. * 
Climbing Claws: +2D to climbing, * 
*See Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, 
more information. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 1 

Character Points: 17 

Move: 12 


Cantina Regulars 
Vareth 


DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 3D+2, dodge 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D+1, languages 4D 
MECHANICAL 3D 


Astrogation 4D+1, communications 4D, 


space transports 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D 

Con 5D+2, search 4D 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 2D+1 
Droid programming 5D 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 11 
Move: 10 


Garron 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D+1, dodge 3D+2 


Template Type: Wookiee Bar Owner 


Homeworld: Kashyyyk 


Blaster 3D+1, bowcaster 4D, dodge — that his height and weight usually gave 
3D+2, melee combat 3D 


Bureaucracy 5D, business 3D+2, in- negate that advantage. 
timidation 6D, streetwise 3D |; a 


cond Edition, page 197 for buthecanalso be callous and cruel to 


= 


ARST 


Equipment: Bowcaster (4D damage), 
200 credits, datapad 

Description: A beigeand gray-colored 
Wookiee, Chalmun has a scar which 
runs diagonally across his left pecto- 
ral muscle, beginning at his shoulder 
and fading out just below his chest. 


Background: Chalmun was a street 
tough as a youth, and quickly learned 


hima distinct advantage ina brawl. He 
also learned that a good blaster can 


The Wookiee has never had much 
need for saving money, and therefore 
lived from season to season on the 
profits from the cantina. 


Personality: The way Chalmun treats 
other beings reminds many people of 
aslightly dim older brother. He means 
well, but gets frustrated and often loses 
his temper. Chalmunis warm to people 
who can handle his rough affection, 


those he doesn't know. 


Objectives: Continue on the quiet path 
toward retirement. 


Quote: (translated) “I don't care who 
those guys are. Kick them out; last 
time they were here, they roughed up 
some of my regulars.” 


KNOWLEDGE 2D 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 4D+1, starship gunnery 3D+1, 

space transports 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 7D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 4D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 9 

Move: 8 

Description: Vareth is a slender Human, in her 
early twenties. Garron is a Sullustan who won't 
reveal his age. 

Background: Vareth and Garron have been 
buddies for years, ever since they met in piloting 
school. Garron's unique sense of humor, and 
Vareth's wise-beyond-her-years knowledge 
quickly made them an inseparable team. 

When Garron's parents died in a shuttlecrash, 


54 


Mos Eisley 


STi 
WA 


Sinthia Pulchatt 


Species: Kibnon 
DEXTERITY 5D 

Blaster 6D+1, dodge 5D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Planetarysystems 4D, streetwise3D+2 
MECHANICAL 31 

Astrogation 4D+1, starfighter piloting 
AD+2 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+1, gambling 5D 
STRENGTH 1D 

Climbing/jumping 4D 

TECHNICAL 3D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Poin! 
Character Points: 9 

Move: 11 

Description: A 2.8-meter-tall insectoid, 
Sinthia Pulchatt is a member of the 
species known as Kibnon, adistant rela- 
tive of the Verpine. Kibnon are green in 


Oxbel 


Species: Devaronian 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Streetwise 3D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 4D+1 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 6D+1,con4D+2, gambling5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 4 

Move: 9 

Description: Oxbel looks the part of a 
typical Devaronian: a humanoid with 
razor-sharp teeth and a pair of horns 
Background: Oxbell is the brother of 
Labria, a Devaronian who used to work 
for Slag Flats. Like his brother, Oxbell 
arrived on Tatooine with the intention 
of a holiday of gambling and having a 


color, and look similar to a Praying Mantis, 
with bulbous eyes atop a slender stalk. 
Their four legs aid in stability to support 
their slender thorax and abdomen. Their 
arms are usually held up close to their 
bodies. 


Background: Sinthia Pulchatt is one of 
many Mos Eisley “spice merchants.” 
Pulchatt was preened for this position at 
an early age, and fulfills her duties with- 
out question; she is a liaison between 
Jabba, and her boss, whose name she 
won't reveal. 


Personality: Pulchatt projects a kind and 
lofty attitude. She is exotic-looking enough 
to parlay that trait into a conversation 
starter; however, she is also looking for 
new spice customers, regardless of the 
harm the spice will do. 


Objectives: To become rich. 


A Quote: “Here, try some. It’s only alittle 
— it can't hurt you.” 


good time. Also like his brother, Oxbell 
has yet to leave. 

Oxbell makes his living keeping his 
eyes and ears open to news, and selling 
that news to whomever would most like 
to hear it. His favorite spots are outside 
Docking Bay 94 and, more likely, either 
the Lucky Despot or the cantina. 

However, Oxbell lacks the talent and 
ambition of Labria: he spends more time 
downing lum than poking around for in- 
formation. If anyone asks, Oxbell is more 
than happy to explain, through slurred 
speech, that he is forced to drink from 
time to time to keep up his disguise. 
Personality: When he drinks (which is 
now a daily habit) Oxbell becomes alter- 
nately morose and chatty. He babbles 
incoherently about both public and pri- 
vate information. 

Objectives: Keep selling information so 
he can afford to drink. 
A Quote: “Damnable Gamorreans. Can't 


trust ‘em. Hey! Spare a credit? I'll let you 
in on some information.” 


Locations 


Mie Viera 


Mike Var 


Mos Eisley 


55 


Beeyon Nace 
DEXTERITY 3D+1 
Blaster 4D+2, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Bureaucracy 5D+2, 
streetwise 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D 


3D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 
Bargain 3D, gambling 4D+1 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 3D 


Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 4 
Move: 10 


so 


iety cut. 


he poured the insurance money into a freighter, 
the Startled Circuit. They borrowed the remain- 
der of what they needed to overhaul and refit the 
ship, and were soon outward bound. The duo are 


currently on Mos Eisley, looking for work. If the 
characters are in need of a ship, Vareth and 
Garron are available. 

Objectives: To pay off the loan they got in 
order to start their shipping business. 


Many consider Jawa Traders to be merely a 
more sophisticated version of a Jawa Sandcrawler: 
Jawa Traders repairs and maintains their Droids, 
but sandcrawlers make house calls. 

Traders is now owned and managed by a Jawa 
going by the name of Aguilae, who bought it out 
from another group of Jawas. Aguilae is not her 
real name, but it is a convenience for those who 
can barely manage Basic, much less the Jawa 
language. Aguilae is a scavenger who displays all 
the worst Jawa traits. She is filthy, ill-tempered, 
suspicious, and miserly. She employs only 
mechanicals because she doesn't trust organics. 
Due to her carelessness and lack of concern, 
Droid accidents are commonplace in the facility. 

However, Aguilae had a problem. As a Jawa, a 
technology hoarder by nature, she found it more 


languages 4D, 


Astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation 


Computer programming/repair 5D 


Description: A heavy man of medium height and pale 
complexion. He is often wearing dark clothing of high 


Background: Beeyon Nace was a promising logistics 
clerk on Coruscant. One little indiscretion with the 


AR 


ARST 


daughter of a ruling governor, and he 
was sent packing. 

His latest assignment is here on 
Tatooine, working for the Prefect, 
counting the freighters that come and 
go. The data is recorded in the space- 
port control tower. 

His resentment is growing and his 
patience is wearing thin. lf plied prop- 
erly, such as enabling him to either get 
off-planet or to be transferred to a new 
assignment (or to a private company), 
he might just offer his extensive knowl- 
edge of the Imperial bureaucracy. 
Beeyon can usually be found lurking in 
the back of the cantina, nursing a drink 
in an otherwise empty booth. 


Personality: Beeyonis perpetually de- 
pressed. 


Objectives: To lose himself in drink. 


A Quote: “It wasn't so bad that I got 
but the fact that all I got to do 
her really bothers me.” 


Personality: Vareth is a practical young 
woman, with a great deal of trust and pride in 
Garron. Garron is expressive, a typical Sullustan 
trait, but can sometimes become morose over 
his recent loss. 

A Quote: “Sure, we can take you just about 
anywhere you want to go — as long as the price 
is right. Trust u: 


E Jawa Traders 


and more difficult to actually part with her Droid 
stock. As she found herself incapable of parting 
with the machines, she contacted the Squib Mace 
Windu, who is now a minority stock holder in 
Traders. Windu owed her money, and in ex- 
change for her forgiving the remainder of his 
debt, Mace paid into the company half of what he 
owed her. In addition, he agreed to help run the 
place for three-quarters of a season for the first 
three years, with the remainder of time to do with 
as he wished. For the next three years, he would 
only have to help out for half a season. He will be 
free and clear after the full six-year period. 

As a Squib, Mace would have liked a more 
complicated arrangement, but Aguilae would 
compromise only so far. Squibs hold few things 
as sacred as bargaining. Reproduction, explora- 


Mos Eisley 


AR rr Locations 


"WA! 


tion, conguest, and acquisition pale in compari- 
son to the Squib haggling instinct. Telling a Squib 
that he is a good bargainer is the greatest compli- 
ment possible. 

Business has picked up, but the money situa- 
tion isn't necessarily better. Aguilae is still a 
collector by nature, and Mace has his own pecu- 
liarities: his deals do not necessarily include the 
exchange of credits. 

Aguilae has been careful to steer him firmly in 
that direction after catching him completing a 
deal in which he offered a buyer from the Dim-U 
Monastery a protocol Droid if she would pay half 
the listed price in credits, and throw in her 
bosses’ old Cloud Car, Aguilae had to spell out to 
Mace that creditors normally want cash, not 
Cloud Cars which no longer function. Mace de- 
fended himself by explaining that he was going to 
have Spaceport Speeders fix the Cloud Car in 
exchange for buying it at three-fourths the going 
rate. That way, Mace would get the same profit as 
he would if he had voluntarily allowed himself to 
be bargained down to 80% of the Droid's list 
price. Aguilae simply shook her head in disbelief 
and went in the back to count her Droids. 

Since that day Mace has tried to adhere to 
Aguilae’s policies. He feels guilty for misleading 
her about the simplicity of recent deals, which, 
despite his best efforts at restraint, are becoming 
more and more complex. 

On the business side of things, Traders has 
struck up a profitable relationship lately with 
Doctor Cornelius and his Cutting Edge clinic. The 
doctor's requests are always for Droid parts, and 
always very specific. Aguilae doesn't want to 
know what the parts are being used for. 


Mace Windu 

Species: Squib 

Height: 1 meter 

DEXTERITY 4D 

Dodge 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D+1, cultures 5D, languages 

4D, value 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 4D+1, capital ship gunnery 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 7D, con 5D+2, search 4D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 5D 

Force Sensitive’ 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 10 

Description: A tiny, gray-furred biped 
tufted ears. He wears a small cap adorned with 
tiny bits of metal serving no practical purpose. 


Background: Mace has been across the gal- 
axy, and is a wealth of useless trivia and 
misremembered facts on the multitude of spe- 
cies and planets in the galaxy. Mace agreed to 
help Aguilae run her Droid shop bi use he 
owed her money. He is loving every minute of it 
andis considering opening his own shop, but has 
no idea what to deal in. 

Personality: Mace seems to be an airhead 
Actually he is a shrewd Squib, transacting busi- 
ness and judging the importance of things ac- 
cordingto Squib values — the love of bargaining. 

Objectives: To honor the Squib tradition by 
achieving the most convoluted bargains possible. 

A Quote: “No deal. Try that again, and l'Il beon 
you like a Squib at a two-for-one sale." 


Aguilae 

Species: Jawa 

Height: 9 meters 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 3D+1, dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Languages 3D, streetwise 3D+2, value 4D+1 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Ground vehicle operation 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Bargain 4D+2, con 4D+1 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, Droid 

programming 6D+1, Droid repair 6D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 6 

Move: 6 

Description: Aquilae is a typical Jawa, with a 
brown hooded cloak and an aversion to bathing. 

Background: When Aguilae acguired Jawa 
Traders, she had no idea how much it would 
occupy her life. Her fondness for Droids guickly 
became an obsession, and Mace Windu was the 
closest she could come to finding a reliable busi- 
ness partner. 

Personality: Aguilae is extremely suspicious 
of non-mechanicals. 

Objectives: To remain around Droidsand other 
high-tech machines. 

A Quote: (translated) “I guarantee that this 
Droid is in good working order and of worth as Í 
represent it.” 


ndcrawlers 5D 


Droids For Sale 
Jawa Traders has a number of vehicle and 
starship repair Droids simply because that is 
what the local market demands. 
These Droids are not types, but specific, indi- 
vidual Droids; as such, they often have higher 
skill levels or better equipment than stock Droids 


————..................————.....220 


Mos Eisley 


57 


would have. Note that skill bonuses listed due to 
equipment are in addition to the skill values 
listed under each attribute. All Droids come com- 
plete with a restraining bolt and hand controller. 


R4-M17 
Model: Industrial Automaton R4 Agromech 
Droid 

Height: 1 meter 

Price: 750 credits (used) 

Move: 5 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

Business 2D, business: agriculture 5D+1, 

languages: computer languages 4D+2, 

languages: Droid languages AD 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Machinery operation 5D+1, repulsorlift 

operation 3D+1 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 4D+2, 

machinery repair 5D, machinery repair: 

moisture vaporators 6D+2, repulsorlift 
repair 4D 

Equipped With: 

* Three wheeled legs 

* Video sensor 

* Two fine manipulation arms (+1D to repair 

skills) 

+ Arc welder (3D damage, +1D to repair 

skills) 

* Video display screen 

* Cybot acoustic signaller (Droid and 

computer languages) 

Despite the R series of Droids having a deserved 
reputation for co-piloting small space craft, after- 
market engineers discovered that the R4 series 
were quite suitable for numerous repair opera- 
tions. Almost identical to the R5 astromechs, the 
R4 series sports the Intellex Ill computer, capable 
of handling both Imperial Navy and Corporate 
Sector Standard transmission modes, although 
not as versatile as the Intellex IV in most R2 Droids. 
Its pair of fine manipulation arms allows the R4 to 
perform intricate maintenance or repair work, at 
the cost of flashier equipment such as an R2's 
holographic projector. 

This particular Droid, R4-M17, has seen better 
days. Its are welder has an intermittent short (on 
a mishap result, the welder further damages the 
subject of an attempted repair, increasing the 
difficulty of subsequent repair attempts), and its 
third leg can no longer retract. Despite these 
flaws, R4-M17 would excel in a mechanic shop or 
farming community. 

R4-M17 is a quiet worker. She is stubborn 
when it comes to completing her assignments, 
and can sometimes be found in the middle of her 


LOCATIONS eS TA Ra 
WARS 


off-duty time finishingupajobthatherowner has 
told her to abandon. She is also rather quiet for 
a Droid, content to let her work speak for her. 
EG-67 
Model: Veril Line Systems EG-6 Power Droid 
1.1 meters 


Cost: 4,000 credits (rebuilt) 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Languages: Droid languages 4D 

MECHANICAL ID 

Energize power cells 5D+2 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Search 4D+2 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Capital shīp repair 4D, machinery repair 5D, 

repulsorlift repair 4D+1, space transports 

repair 4D, starfighter repair 4D+2, systems 
diagnosis 5D 

Eguipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Bipedal locomotion 

* Ultrafine manipulation arm (+1D Technical 

skills) 

* System diagnosis package, including infra- 

red receptor, sonar, X-ray, and spectrometer 

equipment (+1D to systems diagnosis) 

* Cybot acoustic signaller (Droid and 

computer languages; Droid may not speak 

Basic or other common languages) 

* Armored housing (+2D to Strength) 

Power Droids, as a subject, evoke remarkably 
limited interest. Many people consider power 
Droids to be simple mobile fusion generators, 

a -6 is far more than that. 


associated with the equipment it i 
sophi 


nergieing, 
icated sensing equipment can de- 
tect flaws and wear long before routine mainte- 
nance checks normally pick them up. This helps 
reduce the number of potential breakdowns and 


dangerous explosions, as the EG-6 will not pro- 
ceed with refueling if the equipment falls outside 
of preprogrammed tolerance values. This pro- 
gramming has bestowed upon the EG-6 an unde- 
served reputation for stubbornness, but it is in 
the interest of safety. 

EG-67 is rather cranky for a Droid. His memory 
has been wiped quite a few times, usually hap- 
hazardly. This means he remembers snippets 
and pieces of former events and owners, but not 
enough to get a cohesive feel for his past duti 
as a result, EG-67 tends to embellish and inter- 
weave these few scraps of memories into stories. 
Since his acoustic signaller is limited to complex 


Mos Eisley 


SAR LOCATIONS 
WA 


Droid languages (and not Basicorothercommon named Treadwell model. The Cybot Galactica 
languages), he is only capable of relating his company managed to overcome the pitfalls in 


stories to other Droids — many of whichhaveno earlier tread designs by using a pair of heavy- 
interest in the fanciful tales. duty treads powered and steered by a set of ten 
WED15-D3 wheels, along with a chassis with a low center of 


gravity (avoidingtheproblemoftop-heavyDroids 
being unable to right themselves after a fall) 
The WED15 has been deemed 
capabilities outweigh the personalit; s 
DEXTERITY2D can be found almost anywhere on Tatooine's 
KNOWLEDGE 1D surface, repairing and maintaining all forms of 
equipment with microbinoculars that are un- 


Model: Cybot Galactica WED15 Treadwell 


Languages: Droid languages 4D 
MECHANICAL ID 


PERCEPTION 3D Droid Key 


Search 3D+1 A 
STRENGTH ID Worker Droid 
-16 Perimeter Droid 


TECHNICAL 2D S Demi 

Computer programming repair AD»2, a Demolition Droid 
machinery repair 6D, repulsorlift repair 4D, E WEDIS Treadwell Droid 
space transport repair 4D+1, starfighter ŠEG 5 Po ad TS 
repair SD+1 6. EG-6 Power Droid 
Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

+ Dual-tread locomotion 

* Fine manipulation arms (+1D to repair 
skill 


ensible video 
search for micro: 
* Various tool: 
* Cybot acoustic signaller (Droid languages) 
One of the first commercially successful uses 
of treads for Droid locomotion was in the aptly 


nicrobinoculars (+2D to 
le work) 


Mos Eisley 59 


Locations 


matched in their capability to view fine detail 
The Droid has a six-arm capacity along its single 
stalk, but most come equipped with four to five of 
varying strengths and elegance. 

However, the arms are delicate, and they con- 
tinually get caught in machinery as the WED15 
passes by, obliviously hardat work repairingthis 
or that. Replacement arms tend to be of lower 
quality. Its vocabulator is restricted to binary 
languages. 

This particular Droid, WED15-D3, is capable of 
ring virtually any vehicle or piece of ma- 
chinery. WED15-D3 is a suspicious Droid. Mal- 
treated and ostracized since first being placed in 
a job, it resents its perceived flighty personality 
and takes great pains (usually unsuccessfully) to 
counter the impulses which have been pro- 
grammed into it. 


LIN-D2D 
Model: Cybot Galactica LIN Demolitionmech 
Mining Droid 
7 meters 


00 (used) 
DEXTERITY 1D 
Blaster artillery 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Languages 2D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Gambling 5D+1 
STRENGTH 6D 


AR— 
ARST 


TECHNICAL 3D 

Demolition 6D+1 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Dual-tread locomotion 

* Fine manipulator arm under dome (for 

planting explosives) 

e Cybot acoustic signaller (can only speak 

Droid languages). 

* Armored Housing (+2D to Strength) 

The LIN Droid c! is is based upon the familiar 
Cybot Galactica Treadwell design, but with a high 
reinforced durasteel dome. The awkward 
slowness of this mining Droid wasa design tradeoff: 
in exchange for an almost-impenetrable armor 
shield, the Droid could plant mining explosives in 
the most dangerous caverns without concern for 
falling debris or corrosive s 

Alas, the LINs were prone to breakdowns re- 
sulting from the incredible moisture levels com- 
monly encountered in caverns and caves. When 
acharge a LIN was holding went off prematurely, 
causing a cave-in and the loss of ten miners, the 
Droids were pulled off the market. 

LINs can now be found scattered around a 
thousand worlds, performing tasks far beyond 
their original programming. This specific Droid, 
LIN-D2D, was first reprogrammed to serve as a 
data recorder for legal cases. Her second job was 
s a mobile entertainment system ina shipboard 
ino. Fitted with theatrical lasers, prerecorded 
music, and a level surface on top of the dome, she 
would synchronize a light show with mus 
she served drinks. And, using specially-equipped 
gambling tables, she would plug into the table's 
computer terminal and gamble with patro 

LIN-D2D is currently programmed for use 
forward military observer. Her installed program- 
ming module is capable of linking up to common 
combatartillery. The Droid was due foramemory 
wipe, but this was forgotten in the panicky shuffle 
to sell it off before the lieutenant who devised 
this unauthorized experiment was demoted (or 
worse). LIN-D2D is reticent about revealing this 
aspect of her past, and instead discusses her 
previous experience as an entertainer. Not sur- 
prisingly, after five seasons she remains unsold 

J9-6 

Model: Roche J9 Worker Drone 

Height: 1.9 meters 

Move: 10 

Price: 1,100 (used) 

DEXTERITY 2D 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Alien species 5D+1, bureaucracy 5D+2, 

languages 4D+1 

MECHANICAL ID 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+2, sneak 4D 

STRENGTH 2D 


60 


Mos Eisley 


TR LOCATIONS 
II 


TECHNICAL 3D 

Security 5D+1 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Bipedal locomotion 

* Olfactory sensor (+1D to odor-based 
search) 

* Torplex microwave sensor (+1D to security) 
* Arjan vocabulator 

TranLang Il Communication module 

(+2D to languages). 

The Verpine, a highly evolved insectoid spe- 
cies, developed this remarkable unit. Named for 
the secondary species of the Verpine, the J9 
Worker Drone embodies many of the qualities of 
the popular 3PO-series protocol Droid. 

The J9 is equipped with a TranLangll Commu- 
nication module, making it possible to under- 
stand over a million different languages. Its Arjan 
II computer is roughly equivalent in capacity to 
Cybot Galactica's AA-1 VerboBrain. 

The major difference between a protocol Droid 
and a Worker Drone is appearance. J9 Droids 
have insectoid eyes, and piston-like limbs. Their 
legs are even more awkwardly-jointed than a 
protocol Droid. If potential purchasers could get 
over the outer shape of the Droid, they would see 
that it performs almost as well, at two-thirds the 
price of, Cybot Galactica’s offeri 

WorkerDronesare notoriously busy, although 
their ability to complete a job is sometimes in 
question. This Droid, J9-6, has seen his share of 
duty. He has developed a hyperactive twitch in 
s neck servomotors, which causes him to turn 
s head back and forth, as if alternating between 
ctoid eye and then the other. 

LBT-16 
Model: Arakyd BT-16 Perimeter Security 

Droid 
Height: 2.3 meters 
kilograms 


hi 
one in: 


Cost: 3,100 (refurbished) 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Blaster 5D+1, dodge 5D+1, grenade 5D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Languages 3D+1, law enforcement 4D+2, 
survival 3D+1 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Search 4D+1 
STRENGTH 1D 
Climbing 2D+1, swimming 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Computer programming/repair 3D+2, 
security 3D+1 
Equipped With: 
* Video sensor 
leg locomotion 
* Sensor package: Carbanti motion sensor, 
fabritech seismic sensor (+1D to search) 
+ Imperial standard comlink 
+ Arakyd vocabulator (speaks Droid lan- 
guages only 
* TranLang | Communication module (+1D 
to understand languages) 
* Armor (+2D to Strength) 
+ Taim & Bak Repeating Blaster 

Fire Arc: turret 


_ Damage: 6D 

perimeter Droid is a reliable model, 
based on an arachnid design that has long been 
inservice. Its six legs support the abdomen of the 
Droid in which most of the Droid’s sensor con- 
trolsare located, giving it far superior speed than 
a bipedal Droid design. It is capable of sensing 
almost any type of disturbance imaginable: its 
multiple sensors can even detect small animals 
burrowing in the soil underneath it. 

LBT-16, when it arrived at Jawa Traders, wa 
psychological mess. While in excellent physical 
shape, the Droid needed a complete memory 
wipe to overcome whatever traumatic experi- 
ence it had been through. 


KEM Heffs Souvenirs 


This store is, to put it bluntly, a junk shop. The 
shop offers an odd collection of old bannisters, 
ancient Holovid players, cracked hallway mirrors, 
decrepit baby cribs, and other assorted things 
which are of no real value to anyone except as 
curiosities. Behind the counter is a collection of 
unique souvenirs depicting local Tatooine sites. 
One is a glass bubble under which a water-filled 
diorama depicts the Jundland Wastes; if shaken, 
crystalline shards are stirred up to mimic a sand- 
storm. Another is a collection of purplish rock 
chips fused together, with the words “Mos Eisley” 


drawn in glue and covered in sand. Yet another 
item isa tiny shard of pourstone, with a painting of 
the Mos Eisley cityscape. The outstanding offering 
isamounted, glazed Womp Rat. Other knick-knacks 
exhibit the same lack of taste. 

Of course, Tatooine's tourist trade is so small 
that no souvenir shop, especially with this cali- 
ber of merchandise, could make a profit. Thenew 
owner, Moplin (he bought the shop from Tebbi, 
Heff's daughter, after Heff was killed in an unfor- 
tunate incident involving bounty hunters a few 
seasons ago), makes his living not from the shop, 


Mos Eisley 


61 


but through his forgery abilities. The old Sullustan 
can forge false Tatooine township ID's for 100 
credits, false Tatooine passports for a minimum 
of 200 — docucards for other worlds are corre- 
spondingly more expensive because of the more 
difficult nature of getting a good forgery. Such 
forgeries normally require at least a full da 
notice, Prices and times can fluctuate based on 
local demand, availability of suitable materials 
and other factors, so the prices above are merely 
general guidelines. 


Kayson's store has been in business for many 
decades, providing personal armaments to farm- 
ers, street thugs and anyone else with good 
credits. Kayson is a grizzled alien with atrocious 
manners and a seemingly sour disposition. His 
greatest asset is his ability to keep his thoughts 
to himself when dealing with customers. 

The shop is typical Tatooine construction. 
The interior walls are literally covered in new, 
used, ancient and modern weapons (all are kept 
empty and unloaded). Almost anything of a per- 
sonal nature can be found, but heavy artillery is 
unavailable. 

Kayson knows his weapons, and maintains 
them well. His reverence for them shows in the 
care and handling they receive. Because of the 


‘AR 
ARS 


Moplin Jarron 

Species: Sullustan 

Sex: Male 

Height: 1.4 meters 

DEXTERITY 2D 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Bureaucracy 4D+1, bureaucracy: Tatooine 

5D+2, business 6D, languages 4D+1, law 

enforcement 6D 

MECHANICAL ID 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+1, forgery 9D+2 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, Droid 

programming 5D+2, security 4D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Point 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 9 

Description: Moplin is a middle-aged Sullustan 
(indicated by extreme wrinkles around the eyes), 
with an apparent distaste for cleanliness. 

Background: Moplin became skilled in forgery 
after a short stint in a prison colony for 2 
misunderstanding.” The food rationing system 
forced him to come up with a skill with which he 
could barter with the other inmates for food. 

Personality: Moplin is a nervous little being, 
with a perpetual squint and hunched back. He 
laughs a lot, for no apparent reason. 

Objectives: Remain indispensable in Mos 
Eisley so that he can continue to indulge in 
“antiques. 

A Quote: “Well (hee), yes. I can do the job. 
Only a hundred credits.” 


E Kaysons Weapon Shop 


quality of his equipment, most everyone shops 
here. It is not unusual to see off-duty police 
examining the wares. 

Kayson attempts to maintain the appearance 
of a reputable business; however, his skills at 
acquiring contraband weapons, especially on 
this isolated backwater, are exceptional. Black 
market weapons have obscured identification 
plates, and customers can avoid officially regis 
tering them with local officials. 


Bien < ICO 
Heavy Blaster Pistol 1,500 
Blaster Rifle 2,000 
Light Repeating Blaster 4,000 
Heavy Repeating Blaster 6,000 
Thermal Detonator 4,000 


Mos Eisley 


Ti 
"WA! 


EM Dockside Cafe 


This building, adjacent to Docking Bay 92, is a 
small restaurant and bar that hosts numerous 
spacers. Like the Mos Eisley Cantina, it is a popu- 
lar meeting place for those who need to hire 
smugglers for unsavory business. While the 
Cantina generally attracts the most talented indi- 
viduals, those who are newer to the business 
(and thus, eager to take on more dangerous 
missions for lower fees) are known to frequent 
this location. 


The cafe is dimly lit, with many alcoves and 
booths for private conversation. There is no 
gambling to be had here, but there is a live band 
and several very attractive waitresses (always a 
morale boost for tired spacers). The bartender is 
a pokey, bitter Droid named CG-X2R; however, 
the Droid seems to take no notice of what hap- 
pens, so most spacers are more than happy to 
tolerate the complaining. 


IEM Docking Bay 92 


‘This docking bay is owned by Dom Antyll, one 
of the best starship mechanics in all of Mos 
ey. In fact, this bay is used almost exclusively 
for starship repairs, and inits underground rooms 
are all manner of starship repair tools, labor and 
engineering Droids and other items that Dom 
might need (Dom has a distrust of most organics 
and prefers to rely on Droid labor for assistance). 
charges about 125% of what i 


Z 


Mos Eisley 


Dom Antyll 


: Human 


DEXTERITY 1D+1 

Blaster 3D, dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

MECHANICAL 2D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 4D, sensors 5D, space 
transports 4D+2, starfighter piloting 5D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 5D+1 

STRENGTH 2D 


Locations 


63 


TECHNICAL 4D+2 

Armor repair 5D, blaster repair 5D+1, capital 

starship repair 6D, capital starship weapon 

repair 6D+2, repulsorlift repair 6D+1, space 

transports repair 9D+2, starfighter repair 

9D+1, starship weapon repair 9D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 15 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Comlink, fluid-spattered worksuit, 
blaster pistol (4D damage), several cigarras, hat, 
any number of starship repair tools, datapad. 

Description: Dom always looks like he has just 
crawled out from underneath a leaking cargo 


There's not much to say about the “Spaceport 
Hotel” except that the quality of the service is 
about as imaginative as the name of the business. 
It's adequate and nothing else. There are about 
40 small rooms available for rent, each about 15 
credits a night (up from the 10 credits a few 


_ocātions eS TAR 
WARS 


ramp: covered in fluid and grease, with sweat 
triekling down his nose. He is always chewing on 
a cigarra (he never smokes them), and all of the 
pockets in his work suits are full of tools. He looks 
tough and talks tough. 

Personality: Determined. He knows his busi- 
ness and doesn't like people questioning his 
abilities. If someone argues about the quality of 
his work, he doubles his price. If people pay his 
fee and get out of the way he is happy. 

Quote: “You don't think I can do it? Well, son, 
that just doubled the fee... and I tell you what: I'm 
the only person in this town who can fix that 
plasma transvertor. Pay or walk to Coruscant ... 
it’s your choice. 


IE Spaceport Hotel 


seasons ago). The beds are almost comfortable, 
the sonic showers work ... mostly, and the air 
conditioning unit works at least some of the time. 
‘The Sullustan clerk doesn't ask questions, so he 
feels that customers shouldn't ask for favors. 


EFN Mos Eisley Spaceport 


Control Tower 


In the heart of the city, the Mos Eisley space- 
port control tower is responsible for directing 
incoming traffic to landing bays, and is one of the 
few structures in the immediate vicinity fed by 
the city’s central distribution system. 

The tower cor ofasingle Sienar Observa- 
tion Module, which juts up five stories tall, and 
a two-story building that contains centralized 
administrative offices. The age of the tower can 
be verified by the ID plates showing “Republic 
Sienar Systems,” predating the collapse of the 
Old Republic. 

The observation module is designed for up to 
six Droids, with accommodations provided for 
Humans to take over in an emergency. Only three 
stations are occupied at any one time (one by the 
J9-5 worker Droid and two by Human technicians). 
‘The modulealso has a landing beacon so all incom- 
ing ships can instantly get a fix on the city. 

When an incoming ship is detected by the 
spaceport's scanners, the central computer com- 
pares the transponder code with the spaceport’s 
database of pertinent data. Meanwhile, one of the 


operators (either a technician or the Droid) hails 
the ship, requesting the ship's name, previous 
port, purpose of visit and duration of stay. 

There are a large number of corporate-owned 
ports in Mos Eisley; these ports have pre-ar- 
ranged landing times and fees, and are respon- 
sible for their own customs inspections. If a ship 
identifies itself as being scheduled to land at a 
corporate bay, the tower quickly confirms the 
order with the company and then waves the ship 
through immediately, assigning a flight path. 
Companies will often send up escort vehicles, 
either cloud cars or fighters. 

Ifthe ship is scheduled to land in a private bay 
or doesn't have a pre-arranged bay, the landing 
procedure can take a bit longer. First, if a ship is 
landing at a corporate bay, the database search 
is cancelled; by landing at a private bay, a ship 
runs a greater risk of being caught for past illegal 
activities, although this is rare (see below). Sec- 
ond, if the ship has no pre-arranged bay, the 
tower assigns a bay, informing them of landing 
permit cost (normally about 20-40 credits a day), 


Mos Eisley 


Locations 


ZIN 


rane 
N 


Mos Eisley 65 


But They'll Sail Right On Through Customs! 


Well, yes, they will. Almost any ship — illegal or not — 
will be able to pass the Mos Eisley Controllers unless, of 
course, they get JayNine-Five. This is consistent with 
preserving the feel of Mos Eisley as a lawless town. 

This situation is set up to facilitate deliberate story 
manipulation. It is easy to allow the characters to just 
breeze through customs if that is desired; if the characters 
need to be given a tough time, have JayNine-Five assigned 
to their ship. The characters, if they will be making fre- 
quent runs into and out of Tatooine, should probably glean 
the information about the Droid from older spacers at the 
local watering hole. 

Other spaceports around the galaxy have similar ele- 
ments which you can manipulate to allow as much or as 
little harassment as you please (perhaps a spaceport does 
no computer checking at all, but every othership is person- 
ally inspected by an orbiting customs frigate). Just remem- 
ber that just the threat of capture or harassment can often 
be as exciting as actually being apprehended, and avoids 
the monotony of, “What story do we tell the spaceport 
goons this week?” 


and the control tower informs the ship how long 
it has been cleared to stay in Mos Eisley (which 
seems to have no relation to how long the ship's 
captain actually wants to stay in Mos Eisley). 

After this, the tower sends the flight path 
coordinates and asks if the ship requires an 
escort — if so, the pilot must wait a few minutes 
for one of the beat-up tan cloud cars to escort the 
ship to the appropriate bay. 

Atfirst glance, it seems that it would be unusu- 
ally easy for ships to be caught by the control 
tower. However, the spaceport's database of 
ships, restricted cargo types, wanted craft and 
other such pertinent data is incredibly slow. In 
addition, the central computer of the control 
tower is suspect: a few years ago it tried to have 
Moff Julstan's yacht impounded. As a result, the 
two technicians on duty often simply wait an 
appropriate amount of time, and then wave a 
craft through; J9-5 often keeps a ship in an orbit- 
ing holding pattern until the ship is cleared, 
unless the technicians overrule her and wave the 
ship through. If the computer detects a ship it 
deems questionable, the two technicians are still 
likely to wave it on through unless there is over- 
wheiming evidence that theshipis guilty of wrong- 
doing; J9-5 will often demand a full investigation 
(she is almost always overruled on this too). 


Personnel 
The control tower is worked by two Human 
technicians and a Roche J9 worker Droid (the 
Droid is on duty at all times; there are three 
different technicians, so there are always two on 
duty). The technicians are unconcerned about 


66 


ee 2 
AR 


their job: they only work hard enough to prevent 
mid-air collisions. The Droid, however, follows 
regulations to the letter, and thus is despised by 
most traders and smugglers who visit the city. 

The Droid despises the lackadaisical attitudes 
of her co-workers, but she has refrained from 
reporting it. The last time she attempted to, the 
two technicians on duty managed to unscrew her 
hip joints and she spent the next three weeks 
rooted to the spot untila maintenance Droid took 
pity on her and found her legs. Since that time 
JayNine-Five has used a mid-body support if she 
needs to stand for any length of time (several 
bolts are still missing). 

J9-5 

Model: Roche J9 Worker Drone 

Height: 1.9 meters 

Move: 4 


Alien species 5D+1, bureaucracy 4D+2, 

languages 4D+1 

MECHANICAL ID 

Communications 3D, sensors 2D+1 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+2, sneak 4D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 2 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Bipedal locomotion 

* Olfactory sensor 

+ Microwave sensor 

+ Arjan vocabulator 

* TranLang II Communication module 

Description: JayNine-Five is a Roche J9 Worker 
Drone of indeterminable age. She stands 1.9 
meters tall, and would fall over if not for a mid- 
body support which she leans on. She has 
insectoid eyes, and piston-like limbs. 

Background: JayNine-Five has been shuttled 
from owner to owner over the years due to her 
fussiness; she follows orders to the letter. She 
has finally found a job in which her punctuality 
and adherence to discipline is valued by her 
owner. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said 
for her spaceport control co-workers. 

Personality: JayNine remains a bit nervous, 
doing her best to ignore the antics of her bored 
colleagues. 

Objectives: To follow the rules of her job as 
exactingly as possible, and avoid her co-workers. 

A Quote: "Millennium Falcon, you are cleared 
toland. Do not deviate from your present course. 
Welcome to Mos Eisley.” 


Mos Eisley 


i 
WAI 


EM Lucky Despot Hotel 


The Lucky Despot, in its original incarnation, 
was a battered cargo hauler; when the ship be- 
came so beat up that it failed all safety tests, its 
owners let it sit idle until investors, lured to 
Tatooine by the supposed potential for tourism, 
purchased it. Foolishly optimistic, they felt that 
if they only built a better hotel, beings from all 
across the galaxy would come to see the sights. 
They took the ship out of the docking bay in 
which it had been sitting for decades and carted 
it off to an empty lot. 

The Despot was sunk into the ground, with one 
deck below surface level and three above groun 
It then was equipped with the best in entertaii 
ment and luxury facilities. A ground set of st 
running from street level to the top deck, was 
installed with a retractable canopy. The round 
viewports were replaced with aquariums, each 
holding rare fish from a different world; a holo- 
graphic projector, called The Star Chamber, was 
installed in the casino. It was designed to show 
the galaxy in all its splendor, portraying a full- 
color map of the galaxy as seen from Coruscant, 
the Old Republic's capitol. Deluxe carpeting, 
imported wood paneling and luxurious furniture 
was installed in each room. 

Alas, the anticipated influx of visitors never 
appeared, and the Lucky Despot owners were 
ruined. Years later, a young Whiphid named 
Valarian, with an eye out for new investment 
opportunities and looking for a new base from 
which to operate her growing criminal empire, 
greased a few paws and took over the hotel. 

Jabba had a vested interest in frustrating the 
Whiphid. Valarian discovered the ship had never 
been decommissioned and found herself paying 
tax on the property, as well as needing to keep up 
the required permits to operate a passenger 
liner. Next was the inexplicable difficulty in ob- 
taining a liquor license, then the impossibility of 
getting a gambling license (she still hasn't re- 
ceived one). 

Never one to worry about official paperwork, 
Valarian opened anyway. Jabba retaliated with 
thugs, firebombings, and legal wrangling. Valarian 
was stubborn, however, eventually learning the 
source of her problems; she now pays off Jabba, 
and promises to remain a small operation. In 
exchange, thecrimelordalertshertoanyplanned 
police raids which attempt to nab her illegal 
gambling operations. To date, the agreement has 
held. Eventually, Valarian intends to upset the 
Hutt, but she is biding her time, marshalling her 
forces, and probing her enemy for weaknesses. 
When an opportunity presents itself, she intends 


Mos Eisley 


to be ready for it 

As for the Lucky Despot, Valarian has yet to 
pump any real money into it, and it shows. The 
Star Chamber celestial ceiling only partly works. 
‘The carpet is worn and faded. The first class 
staterooms are third-rate. Most of the rare fish in 
the porthole aquariums have died off. Most of the 
empty portholes have since been transformed 
into advertisements for local businesses and 
terrariums for native Tatooine life, such as ugly 
bone-gnawers and hideous gravelmaggots. 

On the plus side, the food is excellent. The 
walls are made of durasteel, riveted and kept 
gleaming. The walls of the top deck curve up 


John Pa Lona 


LOOLLOOL ———————_—_—_—_—_—_—_———_—_———w 


_ocātiontš———"—"—"—"—_—"—_—"—"—"—r TFA Ru 
ARST 


The Lucky Despot 


Top Deck 


Lower Decks 


toward theceiling, which has been replaced with 
a transparisteel viewport with a retractable 
canopy (the viewport is open at night for viewing 
the stars). 

Thereisastaffof40here, counting six Droids for 
maintenance, maid, valet and cooking service. 

1.GrandStaircase And Main Entrance Turbolift: 
This is the main entrance for all passengers and 


customers (employees use the service entrance). 
Both the staircase and the turbolift go only from 
street level to the top deck; those wishing to go to 
other decks on the Lucky Despot must use other 
turbolifts. Characters often have to watch out for 
R2-Q5, a clumsy waitering Droid that seems to fall 
down the stairs at least once a day. 

2. Ramp: Recently installed, most employees 
are still tripping over it. 

3. Front Desk And Lobby: Usually staffed by 
one of a pair of identical twins, passengers are 
often tickled pink when they finally figure it out. 
The pair, Anton and Sturn Brunwin, are attrac- 
tive humanoid aliens from Kiffu, with a penchant 
for swindling. Although Valarian hasn't yet no- 
ticed, the two have begun a money-laundering 
operation on premises. Guests are given pass- 
keys for the various turbolifts in the Despot. 
There are always three guards dressed in bright 
orange uniforms with hold-out blasters (3D+2 
damage) and comlinks (attributes of 2D, blaster 
4D, dodge 4D). 

4. Blast Door And Droid Detector: The broken 
Droid detector has not been fixed by Valarian. 
Despite common attitudes, she has no problem 
serving Droids (some of her best agents have 
been Droids), and in fact has six of them working 
at the Lucky Despot — without restraining bolts. 
The bar is even stocked with lubricant. When the 
ship is shut down for the night, the blast shield is 
lowered into position (Strength 7D). A door has 
been put in the shield, staffed by a security guard 
throughout the night. 

5. Gift Shop: This shop has countless garish and 
overpriced trinkets to remind visitors of the Des- 
pot, in addition to souvenirs that are from the Kuari 
Princess and other famous passenger liners and 
vacation spots. Costs are anywhere from 10 to 50 
credits for sculptures, shirts, holocubes and other 
momentos. The gift shop also stocks entertain- 
ment holos, medicines, toiletries, snack foods and 
other items that guests are likely to want. 

6. Manager’s Office: The current manager, 
Venutton, is a wiry, nervous man. Obedient to 
Valarian for as longas she continues to blackmail 
him, he is an efficient manager and runs a tight 
ship. His office is small and ordinary. 

7. Valarian's Office: Much larger and richly 
appointed, Valarian examines any interesting con- 
versations her observation devices have come 
across, in addition to plotting her schemes from 
this office. She is seldom in her office, as her 
criminal activities often take her away from the 
Despot. 

8. Public Communicators: These holovid 
booths are hooked into Mos Eisley's city-wide 
communications system (each conversation 
costs .5 credits per minute). For extra fees, calls 
can be made outside the city limits (upwards of 


——— es 


68 


Mos Eisley 


Valarian 
Species: Whiphid 

Sex: Female 

Age: 24 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Blaster 4D, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+2 

Business 2D, languages 3D+1, 
streetwise 3D+2, value 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 

Repulsorlift operation 4D, spacetrans- 
ports 2D+2 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+1,command5D+1,con 4D, 
investigation 2 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 5D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D 

First aid 5D, (A) medicine 2D+1 


of two gangsters, she achieved a criminal 
record early. Once her parents were put 
behind bars, this freed Valarian to run 
away and really start moving into the big 
leagues. 

Her latest gamble, opening the Lucky 
Despot under Jabba's nose, is paying off. 
He is leaving her alone to pursue her 
interests, and her interests include find- 
ing out what Jabba is up to. Being the 
second-best crime boss on Tatooine 
doesn't bother Valarian. She knows that 
she will soon assume a larger throne. 


Personality: Valarian has a positive atti- 
tude. She has always succeeded in her 
varied interests and she has no reason to 
think she will fail in this goal. She enjoys 
the company of Droids and treats them 
as equals. 


Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 1 

Character Points: 12 

Move: 9 

Description: A young Whiphid, tower- 
ing and intimidating. 

Background: Valarian seemed des- 
tined for a life of crime. The daughter 


1 credit per minute), including low orbit trans- 
ion to starships. These are a profit center for 
Valarian, as well as a font of useful information. 

9. Restrooms: Typical shipboard accommo- 
dations. 

10. Luggage Check And Staff Dressing Room/ 
Lounge: This open area is used by Valarian to 
keep tabs on her employees. It is rigged with 
various monitoring devices, controlled by a panel 
in her office. 

11. Service Turbolifts: These go to all levels, 
allowing staff personnel to move around easily. 
They are also emergency exits, although anyone 
who accesses them without appropriate pass- 
keys will trigger an alarm at the front desk. 

12. Turbolifts: All turbolifts in the ship can 
accommodate up to six beings. Passkeys are 
required to summon or direct a turbolift. 

13. Lounge: This area is a meeting place for 
anyone involved in clandestine operations aboard 
ship. Strikingly boring, this area does have nu- 
merous booths for private conversations (unfor- 
tunately, the whole room is bugged). 

14. Star Chamber Café: The restaurant serves 
meals throughout the day, but once Second Twi- 
light is over, and the blast shield is lowered, it 
becomes Lucky Despot's casino. The gambling 


Mos Eisley 


Objectives: To destroy Jabba the Hutt and take over his 
business. 


Quote: “My goodness, stop blathering. I do not handle 
business like some other crime lords do. I think this can 
be settled quietly. I understand that the shipment was 
lost. Consider yourself on probation, and report for 
your next assignment. The value of the cargo will be 
deducted from your cut of this new shipment. This 
time.” 


tables are, for the most part, holographically 
projected onto existing tables. Cards and dice 
are hidden in the employee lounge so Valarian 
can claim they are employees’ personal effects. 
The games requiring physical devices are stored 
off the kitchen in empty food crates. 

15. Kitchen. All of the Despot's food is pre- 
pared here, and corner crates hide gambling 
machinery by day. 

16. Linen And Support Services. Supplies, 
linen, and other common items are stored in 
these rooms. 

17. Function Rooms. These rooms support 
various activities, from business conferences, to 
guest entertainments, to rooms for private par- 
ties. They can be rented for 150 credits per day. 

18. Native Tatooine Sandcastings. Elaborate 
sculptures made from colored sands, adhesives, 
rocks, shells and other items found in the wilds of 
the Dune Sea, each sandcasting is considered a 
work ofart, and they are quite popular among the 
trendy wealth mongers of the Core Worlds. These 
particular castings were made by a poverty- 
stricken artist, but are nonetheless beautiful. 

19. Guest Rooms. Guest rooms have single or 
double beds, entertainment consoles, and other 
amenities. They are comfortable by Tatooine 


LOCATIONS mm T AR 


ARST 


ihe:Tatooine:Bureau of Travel and Commerce Presents 


Enjoy the spectacle of an interstellar voyage 
without the expense, and without ever having to leave home ... 


The Cruise of a Lifetime! 


The Lucky Despot is your ticket to a 
fantastic nd getaway. Permanently 
'moored" among the picturesque buildings 
af the oldest part of Mos Eisley (complete 
with on-site ity), the Despot is an au- 
thentic decommissioned starship trans- 
formed into a fabulous dune-side hotel ri 
sort. Enjoy a starfaring voyage in home port 
— safely and in the greatest comfort — 
aboard the fabled Lucky Despot. 
* The exotic Star Chamber cafe features a 
unique starfield projector. Designed to re 
reate the galaxy in all its majesty and wonder 
the holographic display projects a portion of 
the cosmos as seen from Imperial System! 
See planets and moons revolve in full color, 
at speeds of up to fifty times their normal 
orbits. Watch holographic comets fly right 
into your soup! 
+ Visit our gift shop and pick up holocube 
mementos of your "Journey": the Lucky Des- 
pot stocks holocubes from most major cruise 
lines. Let your friends think you were aboard 
the Kuari Princess 
+ The rumble of the hotel's food and water 
processing plant helps sustain the illusion of 
a ship's engine: you can actually envision 
yourself cruising effortlessly through the 
galaxy on a luxury yacht. All the excitement of 
a shipboard cruise for one-tenth the cost of 
those chartered “Galaxy Tours."* 


* Experience an authentic ship's stateroom. 
Each cabin is part of the original craft or was 
purchased from decommissioned “luxury’ 
cruisers. The close quarters that early set- 
tlers might have experienced have been pains- 
takingly maintained to make your stay as true 
as possible. 

* Instead of endless sandy vistas, many of the 
ship's viewports have been transformed into 
aquariums, containing exotic fish from a 
score of alien worlds, while other viewports 
are now exciting terrariums — each hosting 
an unusual example of native Tatooine wild- 
life. Few residents have actually seen a bone- 
gnawer or gravel-maggot this close! 


This season, the 
Lucky Despot is proud 
to present an exclusi 

engagement of the re- 
markable acoustics of 
SySnootles and the Max 
Rebo Band. Fresh off a 
multisector tour, they 
have returned to the 
lovely Despot for your 
entertainment. Their 
sound has been de- 
scribed as “the most 
original interpretation of 
a Sinfonia concertante | 
have yet to experience.” 


There’s a luxury stateroom waiting for you! 
* Registered galactic trademarks of Galaxy Tours, Inc. 


70 


Mos Eisley 


—TAR Locations 


"WA! 


standards, but primitive by the standards of 
most civilized systems. At 50 credits per night, 
they are overpriced. Some also come with cli- 
mate, atmosphere and gravity controls for the 
comfort of guests, although they are more expen- 
sive, and since they are left over from the original 
spacecraft's systems, old and sometimes unreli- 
able. 


Typical Lucky Despot Employee 
Template Type: Obsequious Waiter 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Dodge 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Cultures 3D, languages 4D+1 


EM Zygians 
Concern 


Little more than a branch office (the Zygian 
savings and loan corporate office is actually lo- 
cated on Treylon II), Tatooine's Zygian’s building 
is in the heart of the old section of Mos Eisley. Due 
to Mos Eisley's poor economy, the bank has 
slowly evolved into a pawn shop of sorts. Items 
left as collateral on failed loans have begun to 
clutter the vault area, forcing the officers to 
either consign the items to local shops or sell 
them themselves. Considering the financial straits 


Mos Eisley 


MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D+2 

Con 3D:2, gamble 4D+1, sneak 4D+2 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-5 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Tray, drinks, menus 

Quote: “May | suggest the Ondo Lava '39. An 
excellent, full-bodied wine, with just a hint of 
Dewback spritz.” 


the branch office w: 
for themselves. 
Despite its reputation asa pawn 
offers several feature: 
to a potential custom 


* A triple-tined vault. The safe has a computer- 
controlled timed entry, allowing access only twice 
a day, at second dawn and second twilight. The 
vault has a Strength of 8D, and a Very Difficult 
security total is necessary to pick the lock. Typi- 


71 


Tike Varah 


LOCATIONS "m T = 
eee iW 


John Paul Lona 


cally, there is a total of 200,000-300,000 credits in 
hard currency on deposit. 


+ Just outside the vault proper is a selection of 
safe deposit boxes (Strength of 6D, Moderate 
security total to pick the lock). 


+ A loan rate of merely 15%. This is a far cry from 
the typical loan shark rates of 300% or more. Not 
only is the interest rate much lower, but the 
“penalties” for missed payments are definitely 
less severe, 


The collateral required for a loan is typically 
twice the value of a loan. 

Therearetwo clerks workingat Zygian’s:Sylvet 
Depp (brother of the late Prefect Depp), and an 


ARS 


attractive near-human female named Debrelle. In 
addition, there is Givvers, the manager, a full- 
time maintenance Droid and two bank guards, 
who alternate shifts (attributes of 2D, blaster 
4D+1, dodge 5D, search 4D), with a blaster pistol 
(4D damage) and a datapad/comlink that imme- 
diately alerts the militia when a specific keycode 
is entered. 

One large meeting room has been turned into 
the pawn shop. An additional part time staffer 
works here, helping customers. 

Historically, there has been little trouble in 
Mos Eisley insofar as bank heists are considered. 
Residents who misrepresent themselves and skip 
out on loans, however, are a steady problem. 


Police Station 


With the added attention Tatooine received as 
a result of Lord Vader's efforts to capture stolen 
technical plans, Mos Eisley's Prefect Talmont 
has found himself expanding the size of the po- 
lice force. Formerly, Mos Eisley relied exclu- 
sively upon a small part-time militia and half a 
dozen stormtroopers to keep order. Now, 
Talmont has added a full-time police force (small 
as itis at only 20 officers), and increased the size 
of the militia. However, the larger force required 
room for numerous speeders and related equip- 
ment, necessitating the purchase of a building in 
one of the newer sections of the city. 


Police Station 


Despite new facilities and increased funding, 
themilitia-turned-policeare laid-back about crime 
and corruption. The roof of the main building is 
flat, and contains a marked landing pad designed 
for air speeders and cloud cars; there is a ladder 
leading to the ground. 

Patrol officers are not assigned desks because 
they use personal datapads to process informa- 
tion about arrests and complaints. Since Tatooine 
residents all possess I.D.'s, a simple swipe of the 
card through the datapad brings up all records 
on that inhabitant, including address, closest 
family members, and other pertinent informa- 
tion. This enables patrol officers to operate in an 
independent fashion. 

1. Desk Clerk: From here the desk clerk has 
monitors enabling him or her to watch all four 
holding cells, the entrances to the building, the 
roof, the basement, and the corridors. Monitors 
here display the same information as those at the 
duty station (location 12). All building entrances 
are equipped with sand traps. The door leading 
into the station proper can be locked from the 
desk clerk or the duty station, has a Strength of 6D 
and the lock requires a Moderate security total to 
pick without triggering an alarm. 

2. Fines And Permits Office: Parking fines, 
moving violations, vehicle permits and other 
minor offenses are handled out of this office. 

3. Property Room: All property confiscated 
from suspects is held here until given back to the 
owner, or released as evidence to a trial court. 
Here also is where suspects have their retinas 
scanned and catalogued, and their imaged holo'd 
for police mug shots. 

4. Detective Offices (5): These offices are 
designed for the detectives assigned to Mos Eisley. 
Currently, there are two empty offices. 


Mos Eisley 


TR LOCATIONS 


"WA! 


5. Chief's Office: The Chief of Police, Lieuten- 
ant Harburik, has a corner office. He prefers a 
hands-on approach, however, and can rarely be 
found behind his desk; he does carry a comlink 
with him at all times so he can be contacted if 
necessary. 

6. Questioning Room: This room is used to 
question, or if necessary, interrogate suspects 
and criminals. It has a security door, with a 
keypad required for entry. (Easy security total to 
pick the lock.) 

7. Visitation Room: This room is now bisected 
by a sheet of transparisteel. Microphones allow 
communication between a suspect and the visi- 
tor. The wall has a Strength of 3D, so it isn't truly 
an obstacle to those determined to break out. 

8. Locker Rooms, 9. Rest Rooms (2): There are 
two sets of changing rooms and sonic showers 
for the officers, along with access to the public 
rest rooms. 

10. Security Doors (2): These reinforced doors 
have a keypad for entry (Moderate security total 
to pick the lock; Strength of 6D). 

11. Perimeter Alley: This curved hallway is 
two steps lower than the main floor. This is the 


sole method of access to the cells. 

12. Duty station: From here the duty officer 
can watch all four holding cells. This station is 
elevated above the main floor. 

13. Cell (4): Lower than the main floor are four 
holding cells. The cells include reading lamps, a 
bunk, rest room facilities, and a mirror. At the top 
of the wall, facing the duty station, each cell has 
a one-way transparisteel mirrored window, to 
allow the duty officer to physically view the 
entire cell. (These tiny windows have a Strength 
of 6D.) The opposite wall is composed of iron 
bars with a Strength of 4D; the lock only requires 
an Easy security total to pick. 

14. Speeder Parking: This lot accommodates 
the patrol scooters, as well as the police officer's 
civilian transportation. 

15. Ladder: This ladder goes from the roof 
speeder landing pad to the speeder parking lot. 

16. Speeder Ramp: This is a sloping ramp 
leading down to the basement of the building, 
which has the speeder maintenance garage. The 
ramp has a sand trap “cover” protecting the 
cellar from sand. There is a full-time mechanic on 
the payroll. 


EM The House of 
Momaw Nadon 


Momaw Nadon's home represents a typical 
upscale Tatooine residence. The opulence is 
obvious in the incredible amount of water the 
Ithorian utilizes. Indeed, the house is almost a 
miniature ecosystem. Momaw Nadon's home lies 
at the cul-de-sac of a quiet “street,” formed by 
two long residential buildings, on the southern 
edge of the city. From the outside it looks fairly 
ordinary, with the typical two-story white 
pourstone construction; the ecological wonder- 
land inside is a different story. 

The humidity is the first thing to hit a visitor. 
‘The insulated walls have actual condensation on 
them. The water originates from an artificial 
pond in the center of what would normally be an 
entertainment area. Wildlife of all kinds inhabit 
the forested room, with a majority of the water, 
flora and fauna spilling over into the living room, 
in the first subterranean level below. 

The windows in the house are all very near the 
ceiling, and diffused. There is no direct light 
which hits the plants. This keeps the tempera- 
ture down, and mimics the diffused light which 
penetrates the overhead canopy oflthor’s jungles. 

Few have entered his abode, and none without 
an invitation. He performs all the maintenance 


Mos Eisley 


duties by himself: fertilizing the soil, feeding the 
animals, and changing the water purifier filters. 

Momaw has several carnivorous plants to scare 
unwanted visitors. One particular plant, a 
Vesuvague Hanging Tree, is semi-intelligent. 
Momaw has stationed it over a secret room in 
which Rebel agents seek refuge; it listens to 
Momaw's commands and will attack on command. 


Vesuvague Hanging Tree 
DEXTERITY 5D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D+2 
Attacks: 
Vines (4D+2 damage) 
Digestive juices (6D+1 damage) 


Momaw Nadon 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Dodge 4D, melee combat 3D+1, melee 
combat: powerstaff 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 
Cultures 4D+2, survival 3D+1, survival: 
jungle 5D 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 
Repulsorlift operation 4D+1 


PERCEPTION 3D+1 
Bargain 4D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 
Lifting 4D 
TECHNICAL 2D+2 
First Aid 4D+: 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 2 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 8 


Move: 9 

Eguipment: Agri-kit (+1D to survival), 
powerstaff (STR+2D damage) 

Description: An Ithorian of someageand grace, 


Momaw has a sandy-brown color, typical of 
Ithorians who spend a great deal of time away 
from their homeworld. His dual-throated stereo 
voice is unmistakable 

Background: Momaw was herd leader of 
Tafanda Bay, a grand visitor center on his 


The transport depot is a decrepit and unsafe 
building not far from the center of the city. The 
nd of the large building has a cafe, serving 
g passengers overpriced and undercooked 
food; the east end offers the ticket booth and rest 
rooms. The center area has chairs arranged in 


1% 
7 
f 


$ 


SS 


_ocātionš m S TAR 


gg x, 


homeworld. When the Imperials demanded the 
agricultural secrets ofthelthorians, Momaw knew 
that to refuse would mean the destruction of 
Tafanda Bay, and the loss of many lives. He 
complied and the Ithorians banished him 

Momaw moved to Tatooine to nurse his pride. 
Once there, he set up contacts with the Alliance. 
He also fell in love with Slag Flats, a Tatooine 
settler and one of the original colonists. Since her 
death, he has slowly realized he was using Slag as 
a diversion from his feelings. He knows the time 
is nearing when he must return to the Mother 
Jungle and prove his value. 

Personality: Momaw is a lonely Ithorian, in 
self-inflicted exile. He speaks softly and is a very 
gentle being. 

Objectives: To regain his place among his 
people so that they agree to his anti-Imperial 
position. 

A Quote: “Sometimes one must turn the soil to 
save the garden.” 


EN Transport Depot 


rot with several video monitors to catch the 
latest Tatooine broadcasts; only two of the moni- 
tors actually work. Since Tatooine's lone broad- 
casting station closed down years ago, all infor- 
mation on the airwaves is on disk, and the prere- 
corded commercials and programs are brought 


Mos Eisley 


—TAR LO C T |O S 
Swann Aa a aAA — [] — — 


in once a month. The cost is one credit per ten 
minutes. 

There is a bank of lockers along the back wall, 
of varying sizes. They can be rented for 4 credits 
a week, or 1 credit per day. They use a key lock, 
with an Easy security total to pick the lock. Near 
the front door is a set of videophones with a 
maximum range of near-orbit (as long as there 
are no sunspots or sandstorms). 

The proprietor of the depot is a near-Human 
named Yvonne Targis. She is a nasty yellow- 
skinned spinster of some unknown age. Her hair 
hangs down in wisps from the green bun atop her 
head, and her nails are often jagged. 

Yvonne works for Jabba the Hutt. Some valu- 
able objects are dropped off by smugglers at the 
depot, until one of Jabba's cronies picks it up. 

The depot offers transport to almost any settle- 
ment on Tatooine, although that isn't saying 
much, The company purchases whatever be- 
comes available, so transports include tourbus 
speeders, sail barges, and cargo haulers. 

The following routes and times assumes a 
thirty minute layover at each stop, with trans- 
ports available every three days. The trans; 
makes a complete loop, returning to Mos 
(including the Anchorhead “Circle Route” around 
the Jundland Wastes); the direction of travel is 


EA The Cutting Edge Clinic 


Welcome to a clinic run by a doctor with 
outstanding warrants on over 53 planets. A doc- 
tor who has been given the death sentence in 14 
systems. This scourge of the galaxy is none other 
than the infamous Doctor Evazan. 

Under the name of Dr. Cornelius, this evil man 
runs an office out of a nondescript building in the 
heart of Mos Eisley. 

The shop is a four-room affair. The reception 
room is a tiny area containing little more than 
four chairs and a receptionist. His clerk is a 
Devaronian named Jubel. 

The clinic specializes in cyborging, but the 
operations are seldom successful. The deranged 
doctor has even used Droid parts instead of 
cybernetic equipment upon occasion. Normally, 
his patients, often desperate and destitute smug- 
glers, ship hands and other transitory individu- 
als, disappear after his failed operations, and the 
authorities haven't the time or inclination to look 
into the matter. 


Doctor “Cornelius” 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Blaster 4D+2, brawling parry 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 


——— ee nn 


Mos Eisley 


alternated with each journey. For every stop, the 
ticket costs 2 credits. Therefore, going from Mos 
Eisley to Bestine when going west to south costs 
2credits, but going south to west costs 8 credits. 
Thetransportsarerarelyonschedule, andsome- 
times the whole run is cancelled. Yvonne's house 
rule is that there must be at least four beings 
wanting to ride in order for her to allow the R2 unit 
driver to leave the terminal. Of course, she blames 
engine trouble or sandstorms on the “delay.” 


Routes and Times 


South to West 
Location Arrive Leave 
Mos Eisley — 09.00 
Anchorhead 10.50 
Motesta 13.40 
Arnthout 16.15 
Bestine 18.20 
Mos Eisley 20.20 

West to South 
Location Arrive Leave 
Mos Eisley 09.00 
Bestine 11.00 
Arnthout 13.05 
Motesta 15.10 15.40 
Anchorhead 18.00 18.30 


20.20 


Mos Eisley 


Business 3D, languages 4D, streetwise 4D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 4D+2, starfighter 

piloting 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Bargain 3D+1, con 4D+1, gambling 3D+2 

STRENGTH 3D+2 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D 

First aid 5D, (A) medicine 1D, (A) medicine: 

cyborging 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 6 

Move: 10 

Description: A medium-built man, whosemost 
startling aspect is his twisted, squinty-eyed face. 
His stilted speech and obnoxious manner con- 
tribute to his loathsome appearance. 

Background: Dr. Cornelius is none other than 
the infamous Dr. Evazan, scourge of the galaxy. 
His obsession with surgical cutting and sewing 
has caused untold death and horror. His narrow 
escapes are the stuff of legend. His return to 


Locations. 


Tatooine in the dead of night is bad news for 
anyone unlucky enough to come under his knife. 
Heis hidingfromhis Agualish companion, Ponda 
Baba, who was nearly killed by one Evazan's 
failed cyborging operations. 

Personality: Evazan is as twisted as hīs coun- 
tenance. Although he can assume the attitude of 
a concerned doctor, the moment the patient is 


ARST 


asleep the maniacal laughter of the doctor is 
proof enough of his insanity. 

Objectives: To keep practicing his creative 
surgical procedures. 

A Quote: "Yes, | understand how important 
good looks are. Now, here is the hand that will be 
installed." 


EN Dim-U Monastery 


Visitors to Mos Eisley are quite likely to encoun- 
ter street preachers praising the wisdom and per- 
fect nature of the Bantha. These preachers are 
from a "model" community out in the wilderness 
run by monks of the Dim-U religion. However, there 
is a splinter group with a monastery in Mos Eisley 
itself; this group has no street preachers, but those 
who would seek enlightenment and aid may ap- 
proach the monastery. 

Both groups are opposed to the continued ex- 
pansion of settlements that encroach upon the 


Transponder Codes 


Every ship in the civilized portions of the galaxy is 
equipped withatransponder code: a unique signal beamed 
out continuously to identify each ship. The code includes 
the ship's name, type, owner, and any pertinent data about 
the ship. This code is built into each sublight engine, and 
is created by giving slight variation to the frequency of the 
engine's emissions. This variation, as well as data about 
the ship, is encoded in the transponder director that is 
sealed into the engine itself. This information is regulated, 
handled and dispersed by the Bureau of Ships and Services 
(BoSS). 

There are three ways to alter transponder codes. The 
easiest is to replace a ship's engines with engines from 
another ship, hopefully one with a cleaner record. A sec- 
ond way is to have false transponder codes installed in an 
engine. When the ship is scanned, it will be identified as a 
completely different vehicle — this is a tricky, expensive 
forgery, for if the attempt is failed, the transponder will 
often melt the engine's internal components down, ruining 
it. The final, and even riskiest, approach is to actually 
tamper with BoSS's files directly. This is very difficulty 
because the codes are in an almost indecipherable code. 
However, Drayk has learned how to tamper with decoded 
files, making this process much simpler. 

‘Agents from BoSS are reputed to be incorruptible; Jabba 
the Hutt has found this to be largely accurate. BoSS's 
Tatooine agents were long ago approached by Jabba the 
Hutt; the gangster received no special deais, but was 
offered the opportunity to purchase any information he 
desired, on par with other governments. 


76 


Bantha's traditional foraging grounds, including 
the introduction of new industry. Other than that, 
the two groups seldom associate with each other, 

However, the monastery has a much more 
sinister truth. The building, despite the asser- 
tions of its “abbot,” was chosen for its low rent, 
low visibility, and proximity to the Mos Eisley 
Bureau of Ships and Services (BoSS) office. The 
Dim-U monastery is a cover for a criminal group 
that actively spies on the BoSS offices, and opera- 
tives make a small fortune forging transponder 
codes for wanted starships. 

The building was an abandoned greenhouse 
that the Dim-U sect offered to refurbish at no 
cost. Drayk, the abbot of the Monastery, is a 
shrewd deceiver. He changes both the location 
and facade of his organization every few seasons 
and since his last front was a Bantha stable, he 
had enough visits from the Dim-U clergy to fake 
an organization based on their religion. The con- 
stant harping and harassment about ecological 
concerns for the Banthas, along with the ongoing 
religious disagreements with Oasis, insures that 
the focus of attention is on the antics of the 
monastery, and not the monastery itself. 

Fromthecrypts of the monastery, corruptagents 
tap into the datafiles of the local BoSS office and 
monitor the transmissions from the office. Every 
six months a BoSS ship drops out of hyperspace 
and orbits Tatooine just long enough to receive the 
updated transmissions from the office, and for the 
office to download updates from the rest of the 
galaxy. The BoSS ship then kicks back into hyper- 
space to continue its route. These transmissions 
are decoded for review prior to transmission — it 
is during these times that Drayk's slicers break into 
the BoSS computer system, altering, adding or 
deleting data as necessary. 

‘The monastery employs a group of mechanics 
who can pull apart a sublight engine in order to 
alter its transponder codes. His mechanics work 
in complete secrecy, and normally only at night 
for added protection. If a ship is too large for a 
landing bay, a special expedition can be mounted 
outside the city, but of course, at extra cost. 

This all costs money — payment in advance. 


Mos Eisley 


TAI 
"WA! 


Dim-U Monastery 


This payment plan might startle newcomers to 
the business, but Drayk has no need to swindle a 
prospective purchaser. For a file change, with no 
engine work involved, Drayk usually charg 
credits (although if a ship is particularly 
mous, such as the Millennium Falcon, the cost is 
much higher). 

For custom jobs requiring dismantlinga ship's 
engine to change the transponder director, the 
fee begins at 5,000 credits (for the file change) 
and goes up from there. A typical Corellian light 
freighter might be another 5,000-10,000 credits, 
while any Mon Calamari ship—eachas unique as 
its designer — might run as high as another 
100,000 credits. 

Drayk is aware that some of his business can 
only be attributed to Rebel activities. He has no 
position on the civil war, but does appreciate the 
added profits it brings him. Drayk is also very well 
connected —he can puta customer in contact with 
gun smugglers, forgers, bounty hunters, hired guns 
or any other questionable service. 

1. Main Entrance: The huge doors are rarely 
opened. Instead, visitors are guided to the smaller 
adjacent gate. 

2. Underground Lobby: This roomis accessible 
only from the turbolifts. This is the entryway to the 
illegal aspects of Drayk's operation. Two monk or 
nun guardsare hereatall times, armed with hidden 
blasters. They prefer to discourage unwanted visi- 
tors, rather than directly challenge them. 


Mos Eisley 


3. Rest Rooms. 

4. Workshop (7): Here the technicians work 
on modifying transponder codes by rebuilding 
or modifying ship transponder directors. 

5. Conference Room (Level 1), Tech Room 
(Level 2): The conference room can hold 18 
beings, and sports a burnished table which holds 
the latest in holographic projection technology. 

The tech room is the nerve center of the 
complex. It is from here that the actual BoSS tap 
is achieved. This room of computer equipment is 
hooked into several relay satellites on the roof of 
the building, concealed among older debris. 

6. Workshop (Level 1), Abbot's Office (Level 
2): This room is a standard workshop on the first 
level. The second holds Drayk's office. He pos- 
sesses a system of cameras hooked into various 
strategic locations about the monastery. 

7. Guest Parlor: Here the occasional visitor is 
entertained. This room is a spartan version of a 
hotel room, complete with two double beds and 
bathing facilities. Drayk has a key to this room. 

8. Cell (12): These are the individual rooms for 
the nuns and monks of the monastery. A typical 
room has a bed, dresser, video comlink, and 
entertainment console. 

9. Quiet Room: According to the Dim-U, this is 
a room for reflection and introspection. It is 
actually a game room, with a holochess game, as 
well as an auto-pool table and gooth ball court. 

10. Abbot's Quarters: These rooms are off- 


Jom Pai tona 


Locations 


gg. GUK 


nn 


AR 
ARST 


H i 


DL á 


limits to anyone but Drayk. He can control all the 
equipment in his office from here. He employs an 
Industrial Automaton SE-4 Servant Droid named 
RO2-E, 

11. Scriptorium: Here is stashed the com- 
puter memory banks for all work that the monas- 
tery has performed over the years. It is con- 
stantly backed up and older storage modules are 
copied and updated onto new media. There are 
high explosive charges rigged all about theroom, 
which may be triggered from the abbot's quar- 
ters or abbot's office. If necessary, Drayk has no 
compunction about destroying all records since 
he has complete back-ups hidden somewhere, 
although he won't reveal where (or even if they 
are on Tatooine), 

12. Bantha Stable: A collection of six sorry- 
looking Banthas mill about here at night. By day 
they remain penned in a corral built against the 
outside east wall. 


The Forger's Art 


How difficult is it to completely change a smuggler's 
identity and ship information? The short answer is: it 
depends. It may take a while — “Sure, I can give you new 
1.D.s, but your Droid, see, [don't do Droids. A friend of mine 


on the fifth moon, however...” 

On the other hand, it can be a brief, painless, but 
nonetheless expensive process. The amount of time and 
hassle can easily be customized to fit the adventure at 
hand. 


Bantha 

DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 8D 

Orneriness: 2D 

Move: 15 

Size: 2.5 meters at the shoulder 

Attacks: 

Horns: 7D damage 
Trample: 8D damage 

Banthas are commonly used as beasts of bur- 
den. The rare Bantha that has been trained for 
combat will attempt to trample, but most are shy, 
fighting only when necessary. Banthas can carry 
about 500 kilograms of cargo, or up to five beings. 
The six Banthas at the Dim-U Monastery are 
domesticated, and will flee when frightened. 

13. Kitchen And Refectory: A substantial 
kitchen and dining area were modified from the 
original equipment left here. Much of the pro- 
gramming and hookups are unorthodox, but 
ELGaR — an LGR series Industrial Automaton 
Cooking Droid — manages to keep everything on 
this side of disaster. 

14. Bell Tower: This equipment used to power 
the boom, which is now stationary and juts out 
over the nursery pits. The machinery here was 
converted to a simple signal tower which chimes 
each hour on the hour. 

15. East Gate: This gate is never used. In fact, 
everyone has forgotten it exists. lt is sealed and 


III 


78 


Mos Eisley 


TAI 
WA 


Drayk 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Dodge 3D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

Bureaucracy 4D, business 5D, lan- 
guages 4D+2, law enforcement 4D+1, 
streetwise 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift operation 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 7D+1, con 6D, forgery 9D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Computer programming/repair 3D, 
repulsorlift repair 2D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 14 

Move: 
Eguipment: GoCorp hoverscooter, 
datapad, comlink, blaster pistol (4D 
damage) 


Description: Drayk uses a GoCorp 


has a Strength of 5D. 


16. Pulpit: 


his gantry usedto bean overhead, 


hoverscooter to get around. He has a 
penchant for clothes which suggest a 
military style. 


Background: Drayk, the abbot of the Dim- 
U monastery, is quite a jump from the 
political clerk of yesteryear. After a 
speeder accident left him paralyzed from 
the waist down, Drayk stopped chasing 
short-term goals and set out to build a 
personal fortune. Drayk has an unchar- 
acteristic soft spot for those he thinks 
are in trouble through events not of their 
own making. Being what he calls “a vic- 
tim of circumstance” himself, he will go 
out of his way to correct a wrong. 
Personality: Draykis a very calmman who 
plans as far ahead as possible, and has at 
least three contingencies for every prob- 
lem.Heisunruffled by most turns of events, 
and the only time he gets excited is at the 
thought of an unhappy customer. 
Objectives: To get rich. 


A Quote: “The job will cost 5,000 credit 


Body Strength: 2D 
Weapons: None 


Locations 


John Paul Lona 


mobile feeding sprayer for the three-bin nursery 
below. It is now fixed in place and serves as a 
pulpit from which to sermonize when Drayk feels 
the need to mislead guests. 

17. Cathedral: A huge reactor-turned-temple, 
the massive chamber still reflects its origins as 
the massive electrical turbines remain aligned in 
pairs down the length of the room. The monks 
and nuns have set up pews from which to revel in 
the word of Drayk during faked ceremonies. 

18. Fusion generators (16): These rusted hulks 
arealluseless and remain from the original green- 
house experiment. They are not salvageable and 
lay about the factory in disarray. 


GoCorp JL7 Elixir Hoverscooter 
Craft: GoCorp JL? Elixir Hoverscooter 
Type: Hoverscooter 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: Hoverscooter 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: None 
Cover: 1/4 
Cargo Capacity: 5 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 
Cost: 2,000 credits 
Move: 10; 30 KPH 
Maneuverability: 3D 


Typical Monastery Nun 
Template Type: Dim-U Priestess 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, dodge 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Bureaucracy 4D+1, language 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Astrogation 3D+1, starfighter piloting 4D, 
starship shields 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Con 5D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Computer programming/repair 5D+2, space 
transports repair 6D, starfighter repair 6D 
Force Sensitive?; No 
Force Points: 0 


5 


Equipment: Comlink, hold-out blaster (dam- 
age: 3D+1, range: 3-4/8/12), Dim-U robes 

Quote: “The way of the Banthais one of majes- 
tic beauty and calm peace. Oneness with the 
natural world. Westrive to understand the power 
of the creature.” 


Mos Eisley 


79 


Locations. 


ARST 


EM Notsub Shipping 


John Paul Lona 


Company 


Notsub is easily the largest company on 
Tatooine and employs almost 1,000 beings and 
300 Droids. Located on the northern edge of the 
city, the company is far from the cramped down- 
town area, while being close enough to allow 
many employees to walk to work. 

Notsub's main industry is shipping, but the 
company also owns a stock brokerage, as well as 
a half-dozen other minor interests, and owns 
controlling stock in over 50 more companies. 
Notsub also owns Notsub Security, one of the 
largest private security firms in Mos Eisley. 

Notsub owns a cluster of several warehouses, 
some of which have roofside landing pads, dock- 
ing bays, as well as its corporate headquarters, 
which is a large, two-story affair. 

Diversification has been the thrust of Notsub 
for the past ten seasons, thanks to CEO Armanda 
Durkin. As Notsub has spread its influence, its 


Armanda Dur] 
DEXTERITY 3D+1 


Blaster 4D+1, dodge 4D+2, melee com- 


bat 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 


Bureaucracy 4D, planetary sy: 


financial picture has improved as well. 


Armanda’‘s Rise 


Notsub's upward-looking balance sheets 
weren't always so optimistic. When she first 
began at Notsub, Armanda Durkin was deter- 
mined to make a good showing and wanted to 
make some quick credits. She invested in some 
high-riskenterprises earlyin hertenureat Notsub, 
but things didn't quite turn out the way she had 
hoped: a water-drilling investment came up dry; 
the owners of a telescope manufacturing com- 
pany couldn't focus on their product; and a bro- 
kerage house went broke. 

Undaunted, Armanda decided to take matters 
into her own hands. She reviewed the shipment 
manifest for the next few months, and came up 
with three very interesting prospects from three 
different manufacturers. All were raw materials, 


and often done up in a complicated 
style. When disguised as the Duchess, 
she tucks her auburn hair under an 
aviator cap, and hides her svelte fig- 
ure in a flight jumps: 


ems Background: Armanda Durkin — 


3D+1, planetary systems: Tatooine 5D wealthy power broker and shipping 


MECHANICAL 3D+1 


magnate. She is driven to succeed be- 


Astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation cause of tragedy. Her husband was in- 


3D+2, space transports 5D+1 
PERCEPTION 4D 

Command 6D, con 7D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D+2, stamina 6D+2 
TECHNICAL 2D 


jured and their business was destroyed 
inamysteriousfire. Theinsurancecom- 
pany, Maltsett, refused to pay, citing an 
obscure legal reference. Without the 
insurance payment they could not af- 
ford the treatments needed to save his 


Computer programming/repair 3D, se- life. Nowsheleads adoublelife, stealing 
curity 5D+2, space transports repair her own shipping to make Maltsett pay 


2D+1 
Force Sensitive?: No 
3 


Character Points: 
Move: 10 


Equipment: Comlink, high quali 
space suit, blaster pistol (4D damage, 


3-10/30/120) 


Description: Armanda has a penchant 
for brocade and silks, and only the 
finest of those. Her hair is luxurious 


for its crimes. 


Personality: Armanda, after so much 
tragedy, cares for nothing more than 
money or success, although her con- 
science has bothered her after several 
unnecessary deaths due to her piracy. 
Objectives: To keep Notsub's coffers 
full, using the blood of the Maltsett 
insurance company. 

A Quote: “Please remain seated or we 
will be forced to knock you uncon- 
scious.” 


80 


Mos Eisley 


STAR Locations 
SP. —_  — eee 


all were to be shipped on Notsub's Corvettes, 
and all were insured by Maltsett Insurance Com- 
pany. Since she had a personal grudge against 
Maltsett, Armanda set into motion a wild swindle. 

Getting financing to purchase an armed and 
armored freighter was performed with little ef- 
fort. Getting a transponder signal altered was no 
problem and picking up a signal jammer was 
easy, considering her wealth. And aligning her- 
self with the type of people willing to do the tasks 
she required was incredibly easy, considering 
the fact that she was in Mos Eisley. 

She and her group of toughs left that night on 
this new freighter, the Vengeful Sandstorm. A 
Corvette carrying plastisteel left a Notsub dock 
destined for an office building at the Imperial 
maintenance facilities on Myomar. Theship never 
made it out of the system. Armanda’s freighter 
overtook the plodding Corvette, and 
undermanned and poorly armed, the Corvette's 
crew surrendered. Armanda’s thugs lightened 


the Corvette's load and left for the far side of 
Tatooine's moon, where they waited for the rest 
of the night. Armanda was later able to sell the 
plastisteel at a tremendous profit, plus she was 
able to claim insurance money for a stolen cargo. 


Thus began Armanda Durkin's double life as the 
pirate named Duchess. 

Armanda Durkin has continued her piracy and 
her actions helped to turn Notsub around. With 
fluid capital, she was able to diversify, pursue 
highly profitable, but legal cargos, and make a lot 
of money. Her piracy continued (she began prey- 
ing on non-Notsub ships in other systems), and 
thanks to companies who wouldn't question the 
source of products, made a fortune. Notsub has 
also purchased smaller companies that use ma- 
terials directly, write off their raw materials pur- 
chases to bogus corporations, and manufacture 
high profit items. 

Of course, Armanda is getting worried, If she 
continues, her piracy is likely to be revealed. She 
t is time to get out of the business, She was 
spooked by a recent incident, when some 
unfortunate cargo haulers thought a cargo of 
Droid parts was worth fighting over — twelve of 
them lost their lives. Armanda discovered that 
the Droid parts were actually smuggled medi- 
cines. Through various contacts she was able to 
deduce that they were most likely destined for 
the Rebellion. 


Thrung Alewune 


DEXTERITY 4D 
Blaster 4D+2, dodge SD, melee combat 
5D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Streetwise 3D+1 

MECHANICAL 2D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 3D, starship 
gunnery 4D+1, starship shields 3D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Gambling3D+2, search 4D, sneak2D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D+1, lifting 4D 
TECHNICAL 3D+1 

Computer programming/repair 4D+1, 
demolition 3D+2, space transports 
repair 4D+2 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 3 

Dark Side Points: 3 

Character Points: 10 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Comlink, high quality 
space suit, 2,500 credits, blaster car- 
bine (5D damage, 3-25/60/250) 


Description: Thrung is a Ho'Din who 
has bound his ample violet locks to 


Mos Eisley 


his head and wears a cap. His height can 
be intimidating to those unfamiliar with 
his species’ natural gentlenes: 


Background: Thrung Alewune is a typi- 
cal pirate under Armanda's command. 
This Ho'Din has been around the galaxy 
a few times, so he has amply experience. 

Thrung is getting weary of Armanda's 
moral code against killing. The group has 
missed out on choice opportunities for 
increased wealth simply because 
Armanda will not allow her crew to strip 
the passengers of their personal valu- 
ables. He has suggested to Armanda that 
it is time for her to hang up her pirate 
career; Thrungis gaining converts among 
her crew. 


Personality: Thrung considérs it an as- 
set to exhibit none of his species’ charac- 


teristic gentleness. He has renounced his species’ love 
of nature and has turned all his energies toward in- 


creasing his understanding of technology. 
Objectives: To insure profitable runs. 


A Quote: “Look, I'm here just for the cargo. Don't try 


anything and we'll be out of here in no time.” 


Locations 


AR 
ARST 


EM Notsub Security 


82 


Notsub Security is the largest private security 
firmin Mos Eisley, employing over 500 people full 
time, and providing security to numerou 
businesses and corporations. Like mos 
Eisley company patrol craft, Notsub's ships are 
nsed only for atmospheric travel. 

The company is based in a two-story ware- 
house facility, only a few blocks from Not: 
corporate headquarters, containing no less than 
a dozen cloud cars, several unarmed land- 
speeders, and, of course, all supplies and equip- 
ment for its guards. Guards are typically given 
landspeeders for long-range patrols around large 
facilities, or conduct foot patrols for whatever 
maller buildings are being patrolled. All Notsub 
contracted buildings have also been equipped 
with alarm systems, so that if they are tampered 
with, Notsub can send guards in response. 


Typical Notsub Security Personnel 
DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Blaster 4D, dodge 4D+2, melee combat 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Cultures 3D+1, 
5D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D 


li 


languages 4D, streetwise 


Search 4D, sneak 2D+2 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 4D+2 
TECHNICAL 2D+2 
Security 3D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Poin 
Character Points: 
Move: 10 


)-3 


Equipment: Protective desert clothing, 
filtermask, Sharpshooter V blaster (4D+1 
), Ū) 


g 50) 
A Quote:“Trespassingis against the law. Leave 
now or we will take you into custody by whatever 


means necessary.” 
Bespin Motors Hurricane 506 
Cloud Car 


Craft: Bespin Motors Hurricane 506 
Cloud Car 

win-Pod Cloud Car 

Speeder 

epulsorlift operation: cloud car 

Crew: | 

Passengers: | 

Cover: Full 

Cargo Capacity: 15 kilograms 


Mos Eisley 


ST Rs L-O C A EO S 
SWAR IM 


Cost: 60,000 credits Fire Control: 1D 
Move: 520;1500 KPH Range: 50-400/900/3km 
Maneuverability: 2D+2 Damage: 3D 
Body Strength: 2D+2 Thetwin-engineHurricaneCloudCarisasingle- 
Weapons: cockpit vehicle, with a cramped toboggan-like 
Double Blaster Cannon spaceforthe pilot and co-pilot. One of the variant 
(fire linked) predecessors of the highly popular Storm IV, the 
Fire Arc: Front Hurricane has a tendency to roll to the left when 
Crew: 1 accelerating. Other than that, however, it is a 
Skill: Vehicle blasters durable machine with an excellent repair record. 


—S— aaaaaaaaasasasasasasasasasasasasasasasalaltlalaliIiaIaIaIassss5s 


Mos Eisley 83 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas = 


ARST 


84 Mos Eisley 


TAI 
WA 


I Chapter Three 
Adventure Ideas 


Mos Eisley is a rich and varied adventure 
locale, providing countless conflicts and person- 
alities to interact with. Because of Mos Eisley's 
natureas a lawless, smuggling center, characte! 
an be drawn here for any number of reasons. 
Smugglers and cargo handlers can be called here 
ona simple cargo run. Rebel Alliance operatives 
may have to come here in order to get inform 
tion, weapons or contraband supplies (such as 
military-issue blast vests or heavy duty power 
generators). Characters may come here ona tour 
of the Kuari Princess, intent on a Krayt Dragon 
hunt. In the end, if characters are landing on 
Tatooine, they will pass through Mos Eisley. 


Spice Runner's Gamble 

Anew spice merchant has come to Mos Eisley 
in an attempt to win Jabba's trade. The charac- 
ters are targeted as one group who can help start 
this new smuggling ring. 

This adventure allows characters to immedi- 
ately get a feel for the nature of Mos Eisley and the 
people who live there; gullible characters are in 
for an interesting time. This adventure hook 
works best if the characters are destitute and 
willing to do almost anything to earn a few hard 
credits. But, then again, when aren't characters 
in this situation? 

‘There are two ways to get into this plot. The 
first is if the characters find out about the smug- 
gling ring and then volunteer for work. The sec- 
ond is to have the characters stumble upon the 
whole situation and get forced into participating, 
working as pawns for Jabba the Hutt. 

Episode One: When the characters arrive at 
Mos Eisley, they will hear word about town that 
anew spice dealer has entered the crime scene in 
ley. Most who talk about the situation are 
bout how dangerous it is to intrude upon 
the Hutt's trade, and once Jabba finds out who is 
behind this they are dead. Nonetheless, the spice 
dealer is offering excellent prices — if someone 
can get a load or two before the Hutt cracks 
down, they stand to make a fortune. 


Mos Eisley 


The group spends some time tracking down 
rumors, going from bar to bar. It seems that no 
one wants to talk to them — and if they are too 
obvious, they will attract the attention of some of 
Jabba’s goons (see their stats in location 13, 
*Jabba's Townhouse”), who will clumsily follow 
the characters around town. The characters 
should be able to figure out that they are being 
followed and be given ample time to lose them or 
set an ambush. 

Eventually, they are told that a group of the 
new spice smugglers are meeting that evening in 
Docking Bay 56, a decrepit and abandoned dock- 
ing bay on the northern edge of the city. If they 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


want a contract, they are to be there. 


Episode Two: Arrivingat DockingBay56, things 
appear suspicious. The characters will be totally 
justified in thinking that they are walking into a 
trap, although the information they received is 
legitimate. Characters making Difficult search or 
Perception totals will notice several disguised 
thugs near Docking Bay 56, and as the characters 
pass, the thugs callto someone on their comlinks. 

As they approach the entrance of the docking 
bay, they are confronted by a tough-looking thug 
who approaches them from a darkened alley 
across the street. He questions them about their 
intentions, who told them to come here and so 
forth. lf they answer truthfully, they are allowed 
to enter. 

Entering the docking bay, they see a place that 
has obviously been abandoned for decades. All 
of the machinery is falling apart, the cargo ramp 
creaks when people walk on it, and only two or 
three of the dim landing lights work (there are no 
other lights in the bay). Soon, three or four other 
groups of individuals come out of the darkness 
and introduce themselves as other smuggler: 

A weaselly Rodian walks forward, introducing 
himself as Dwess, an employee of the new smug- 
gling lord. He repeats everything the characters 
have heard before — his boss is looking for new 
spice smugglers — and tells them point blank 


that this operation will be run differently than 
other smuggling operations. He is selling spice at 
the rate of 45,000 credits a “smuggle” load (half a 
ton) — less than a third of what a crimelord 
normally has to pay for one. The smugglers who 
buy the cargos are free to resell the goods to 
whoever they want to at whatever price they 
want. If they want in, they have to come up with 
a 5,000 credit deposit for the next meeting in two 
days 

Characters figure that if the deal is legitimate, 
they could earn a huge profit by selling directlyto 
a spice dealer. Now, if only the characters could 
figure out a way to raise some credits to buy that 
initial shipment 


Episode Three: The characters have to spend 
their time trying to borrow money from less than 
legitimate sources (a bank isn't likely to loan 
money for this type of operation). This means 
that they may have to approach Jabba, coming 
up with a cover story about “ship modifications," 
or approach the gangster Valarian, or even try to 
approach one of their past customers. If the 
characters are having trouble, have them meet 
an eccentric, rich codger who is looking for ad- 
venture and excitement and who is willing to loan 
them the money in exchange for a cut of the 
profits. 

Note: If the characters are to “stumble” into 


Mos Eisley 


STAR Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


WA 


this plot, they will simply hear about the meeting 
after it occurred. Unfortunately, some of Jabba's 
goons will think that they were at the meeting 
and will threaten them ifthey don't help them get 
Dwess by going to the next meeting. 

Once they have secured the money, cut to the 
sis present along with several new 
-person airspeeder. He explains 
that the ships will be loaded in the sand flats to 
the south of town, where their business will be 
less conspicuous. He gives each of the smugglers 
a datamap (on datapad disc) in exchange for a 
deposit of 5,000 credits, telling them to meet him 
there in five hours. After getting their money, 
Dwess and his thugs take off into the night, 
explaining that they have to prepare their car- 
gos. He gives each of the characters a small bag 
of spice as well, worth about 1,000 credits, as a 
show of good will and to prove the quality of the 
product. 

If any characters appear unhappy with this 
idea, he will simply tell them to leave, and then 
send a group of his enforcers after them. If a 
firefight breaks out in the abandoned landing 
bay, Jabba's goons will charge into the fray as 
well, making for a complex situation for the char- 
acters: there is vast potential for confusion, as 
Dwess and his goons will try to escape with 
whatever money they can; Jabba's goons are 
trying to get Dwess, but also want to take out the 
smugglers; and, the various smuggler parties are 
trying to get out with their lives 


Episode Four: The final meeting spot, late at 
night in the sand flats outside of Mos Eisley. 
Whatever smugglers paid their money will be at 
the site, but not Dwess. However, there are some 
people whowant to meet them— first, Tatooine’s 
militia shows up, ready to arrest everyone carry- 
ingspice (that's why Dwess gave them the bags). 
Second, Jabba's goons arrive in force equaltothe 
militia, ready to eliminate all of the smugglers 
who were willing to sell out to another spice 
merchant. 

Surprisingly, the militia commanding officer 
decides to leave after confiscating the bags of 
spice and whatever credits the smugglers have 
with them. Jabba’s goons will hold the smugglers 
prisoner for several hours, until just before dawn, 
when a small sail barge approaches. On it is 
Jabba himself, who is curious as to why the 
operation is taking so long. Then he laughs, ridi- 
culing the smugglers — they have fallen for a con. 
Dwess had no other spice, and has simply taken 
their money. He releases the smugglers, encour- 
aging them to hunt down Dwess and get their 
revenge, for he has made a fool of them all. If the 
characters ask around town, especially in the 
Mos Eisley Cantina, they will learn that a Rodian 
con man with a battered freighter lifted off a few 


Mos Eisley 


hours ago, destination unknown. 


A Rebel Agent 
The characters are investigated by Lieutenant 
Harburik, under suspicion of being Rebel Alli- 
ance agents. They must find some way to prove 
that they are innocent of the charges. 


Episode One: The characters encounter one 
of their acquaintances in Mos Eisley, who warns 
them that something is up with the local Prefect, 
and it seems to involve them. He advises them to 
keep their heads low, and to try to find out what 
going on; he says that they aren't advised to 
leavesince the militiaand even thestormtroopers 
based on the planet are probably trailing them 

He suggests that they go to the Mos Eisley 
Cantina and try to meet Beeyon Nace, a regular 
there who works for the government and seems 
easily bought for information. 


Episode Two: Venturing to the cantina, they 
have a variety of “typical” street encounters, 
such as a firefight breaking out between rival 
thugs, a Jawa who tries to sell them an obviously 
malfunctioning Droid, and a thief who tries to 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas munn 


88 


steal some credits while they are distracted by a 
street performer. 

Once they get to the cantina, they can meet 
Nace easily, and he seems interested in talking to 
them as long as they are supplying drinks. They 
can quietly pump Nace for information: inter- 
spersed with ramblings he will let slip that the 
Prefect thinks that Voren Na'al, a researcher for 
the Rebel Alliance, is back on the planet. He 
thinks there's a reward worth several thousand 
credits on his head. The Prefect believes that one 
of the characters is Na'al, and Nace obliviously 
describes Na'al's companions, giving a complete 
description of all of the other characters. He says 
that the Prefect is trying to decode a datatape 
that Na’al left behind on a previous trip — at this 
point thereisno hard evidence against the people 
the Prefect is seeking, but he figures he should 
capture and interrogate them now, hoping that 
they'll confess and he won't have to have the 
tapes decoded. The tapes are currently at the 
Regional Government Offices (location 11), 


To: Prefect Talmont 


All may not be Ic 


ARS 


Nace will ask the characters for a ride off this 
miserable dust-ball, showing enthusiasm for be- 
ing taken to almost any other world. The episode 
concludes when the Tatooine militia wanders 
into the Cantinaand saunters over to the bar. The 
bartender shrugs, but a short alien with long, 
pointed ears points directly toward the charac- 
ters. It's time for a fast exit ... 

Episode Three: The characters should have 
concluded that they will have to break into or go 
to the Regional Government Offices. If they go 
during the day, there are three lazy clerks who 
pay the characters no attention unless they try to 
go into Prefect Talmont's office. They will try to 
stop them, but have no weapons and noalarms to 
sound, so the characters will certainly be able to 
force their way in. 

Ifthe characters try to sneak in under cover of 
night, no one works there. The door has an alarm 
and requires an E security total to open (fail- 
ing the roll triggers the alarm). The can also pry 


however. One of my 


From: Lieutenant Harburik 

Subject: Apprehending and detaining sus- 
pect subversive #354 

Sir, the investigation continues. The subject 
and his friends will no doubt be apprehended 
shortly 

The other disk contains the captured en- 
coded datadisk which we believe to be from the 
subject. Translation efforts on our part have so 
far proven fruitless, although once we crack the 
code, no doubt we will have the evidence to 
convict him 


Subject: Apprehending and detaining sus- 
pected subversive #354 

Pursuant to your orders, the apartment was 
searched. Apparently the subject knew he was 
targeted for interrogation, because there was 
evidence of a hasty departure. The apartment 
itself revealed no clues as ta his current where- 
abouts, although our informants place him as 
an active member of the Rebel Alliance 

The landlady has been thoroughly questioned 
She has no information regarding the target's 
mission or destination. 


officers located a datapad on which several files 
had been erased. We managed to extract most 
of the files using standard recovery protocols 
However, the contents of the were coded; 
we are currently attempting to unravel the 
codes. l'm certain that these files contain the 
evidence we require. | have enclosed copies of 
the files for your perusal. 

imperial Intelligence knows something of the 
author of these files, Voren Na'al. According to 
their records, Na'al served for several years as 
a reporter for the Galactic News Service. He is 
now assistant to the Rebellion's Master Histo- 
rian, Arhul Hextrophon. Na'al has been report- 
ing on the traitors intimately involved in the 
Incident at Yavin. 


To: Police Officer Dokus 

From: Lieutenant Harburik 

Subject: Apprehending and detaining sus- 
pected subversive #354 

Officer, this datatape may be of some use to 
us. Our encryptors are currently trying to 
determine the underlying codes to extract the 
sensitive information we require 


etd 


Good work! 


Mos Eisley 


To: Lieutenant Harburik 
From: Prefect Talmont 

Subject: Search for suspect subversive #354 
Harburik, this tape is garbage. The traitor 


obviously left behind this tape in a foolish 
attempt to mislead the Empire. Your investiga- 
tors clumsily blamed several innocent persons 


Rs Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


Consider yourself fortunate that you are 
serving under the command of such an astute 
bureaucrat as myself; one who is not quite as 
gullible as you 

Destroy all copies of this nonsense, or | will 
make sure that this information is placed in 
your permanent record. lt would be a shame to 


| want them disciplined. 


see you stuck on this planet fore 


open the windows with a Ve Dexterity 
total; there are no alarms on them. 

When they break into Prefect Talmont's office, 
they will easily find a pair of datadisks, both 
labeled "V. Na'al Investigation,” on his desk. 

‘The first disk contains the memos regarding 
the Voren Na'al incident (see page 88). 

The characters should try toalter the informa- 
sted that they choosesomething 
arecipe database. Atthe very 
least, it must be something so simple that it 
proves that the characters aren't Rebel sympa- 
thizers. Altering the information requires a Mod- 
erate computer programming/repair total, al- 
though the characters will have to keep low when 
militia patrols stop by to check on the building. 
‘The scene in which they are altering the informa- 
tion should be tense and dramatic, but not too 
dangerous 


Episode Four: The characters find out from 
Beeyon Nace or other contacts on the street that 
Prefect Talmont has realized that this was a 
colossal case of mistaken identity and they are 
no longer wanted for guestioning 

They also learn from Nace or some other 
person involved with the government that what 
really happened is that the information was fi- 
nally decoded and turned out to be whatever the 
characters inserted. Additionally, their contact 
got a copy of the memo Prefect Talmont sent to 
Harburik (see above). 


Scavengers' Race 

The characters learn that a modified Corellian 
Corvette crash landed in the desert during a 
brutal sandstorm. Notsub Shipping is offering a 
finders’ fee of 5,000 credits to the first individuals 
who find it — Notsub can only track it down toa 
2,000 square kilometer area, and sensor scans 
aren't able to pick out the ship. The characters 
will be racing several other groups and possibly 


Mos Eisley 


jandcrawlers for the find. 


Episode One: The characte: ofthe ship 
either through contacts they have with Notsub, 
or from some guards who are off-duty discussing 
the matter. They learn that the Corvette crashed 
far out in the desert and that Notsub is quietly 
sub-contracting groups tofind the vessel. Notsub 
wants to keep the incident from becoming public 
knowledge for fear that other companies will try 
to claim it. Notsub will hire the characters, pay- 
ing a 500 credit search fee, which is theirs to 
keep, and they will give another 4,500 if they find 
the ship. 

The characters have one night to equip them- 
selves with any gear they think they might need 
Notsub will be loading them and three other 
search groups aboard a search vessel in the 
morning. If the characters decide to go out on the 
town, encourage them to have a run-in with 
another group of revelers — the group turns out 
to be a rival group of explorers. 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


Episode Two: The characters meet at the 
designated landing bay at Notsub headquarters 


All of the character. stowed aboard a 
Corvette, along with that of three other groups of 
rough mercenaries who are also looking for the 
ship. Each group is given pair of airspeeders for 
the survey, in addition to survival gear. 

The trip to the search site is a great opportu- 
nity to introduce the other search parties. At 
least one group should be antagonistic and clearly 
willingto be underhanded to get the prize money, 
and the Notsub guards refuse to stop the conflict 
—they don't care who or how the ship is found as 
long as it ís found. 

Once they land and make camp, the search can 
begin in earnest. However, Tatooine isa big desert. 
During the day, the characters can have a run-in 
with a Krayt dragon, or Tusken Raiders or any 
number of other natural hazards — a sudden 


R— 
ARST 


sandstorm could certainly liven things up. Addi- 
tionally, feel free to introduce new predators to 
Tatooine — perhaps a Sarlacc type of monster, a 
sand-snake or other creature could prove exciting! 

Eventually, just before a chilling and deadly 
cold night begins, the characters find the ship. 
However, they have to return to camp that night. 
Meanwhile, the rival group has figured out what 
the characters have done. The characters may 
choose to watch their rivals, or decide to salvage 
at night — no matter what, though, they will get 
no help from their employers unless someone 
seems ready to damage the ship. 


Episode Three: The gamemaster will find the 
maps of the Corellian Corvette on pages 64 and 65 
of The Rebel Alliance Sourcebook helpful in run- 
ning this scene. The Notsub security guards in- 
form the characters that their goal is the forward 
hold on deck four of the ship, and they must 
retrieve the gear. The ship's third and fourth 
decks are buried in the sand, so the characters 
will have to cut through the hull on the second 
deck and then make their way down. The guards 
call for assistance, and explain that cargo haulers 
will arrive in a few hours — until then, the char- 
acters must help retrieve the cargo to get their 
money. 

All of the turbolifts are inactive; they'll often 
have to use access shafts to get between decks 
Allof the crewmen were killed in the crash and all 
on-board Droids have either been damaged be- 
yond repair or ran out of power. When the char- 
acters investigate the ship, they face the follow- 
ing obstacle: 


* Live cables prove an obstruction. The charac- 
ters must make Moderate Dexterity totals not to 
touch them or find some way to remove or de- 
electrify them. 


* Clumps of mynocks have attached themselves 
tothe ship, entering through various holes. They 
need to be flushed out to get to the door on the 
other end of the hallway (see the Star Wars 
Sourcebook for mynock statistics). 


* The way is blocked. They must turn back and 
find another route. 


+ A pack of womp rats have formed a den just 
outside the computer core, and have no desire to 
leave. 


Womp Rat 

DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 1D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
Mov: 
Size: 
Attacks: 

Claws: 2D+2 damage 

Teeth: 3D+1 damage 


meters long 


90 


Mos Eisley 


eR Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 
-WAI 


Ponda Baba 


Height: 1.85 meters 
Species: Aqualish 

Sex: Male 

Homeworld: Ando 

Age: 29 

DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Brawling parry 4D+1, melee combat 4D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Alien species 3D+2, intimidation 5D 
MECHANICAL 3D+2 

Astrogation 4D+1, space transports 4D+2, 
starship gunnery 4D+2 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 5D, stamina 5D 

TECHNICAL 2D+2 

Space transports repair 3D+2 

Story Factors: 

Obsessed: Ponda Baba is determined to get 
revenge against Dr, Evazan for his failed cyber- 
netic experiments on Baba's arm. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 12 

Move: 10 


Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D damage), gre- 
nades (5D damage), club (STR+ 1D damage) 


Description: Imposing and intimidating, Ponda 
Baba dresses in common spacers’ garb. Ponda 
Baba lost his right hand in a battle with Obi-Wan 
Kenobi; he hasn't yet received a prosthetic re- 
placement, so his arm is a hideous sight. He 
attempts to conceal his weapons beneath his 
jacket, hoping to goad others into fights. 


Background: Ponda Baba was a long-time com- 
panion to the infamous Dr. Evazan. The two had 
developed quite a reputation as smugglers, and 
were famous for starting fights with many de- 
fenseless foes in cantinas around the galaxy. 
Evazan's horrible mutilations of his “patients” 
were famous enough to earn him a death sen- 


Combat: These vicious Tatooine natives at- 
tack in packs of up to five. The hairy carnivores 
usually circle once, then lunge. They scatter 
when a total of three wounds has been inflicted 
upon the pack as a whole or an incapacitated 
result has been inflicted on any single individual. 


* When passing through a large area, noxious gas 
fills it (attacks with 4D versus Strength — on a 
wounded or better result, character is overcome 


Mos Eisley 


tence in over a dozen systems, 
and Evazan's victims are offer- 
ing a million credit bounty on 
the doctor's head. Ponda grew 
to enjoy the notoriety and atten- 
tiontheDoctor'scompanionship 
earned — he learned that most 
people were scared of the doc- 
tor due to his reputation and 
would doanythingto get the pair 
out of their company. Ponda 
found that he could get what he 
wanted with little hassle with 
Evazan at his side. 

After Ponda lost his arm, Dr. 
Evazan attempted to attach a 
cyberneticreplacement, but the 
operation was a miserable fail- 
ure. While Dr. Evazan fled the 
world, Baba spent several 
weeks recovering from the 
trauma of the operation. Baba 
dedicated himself to hunting 
down and killing Evazan. After 
several months of unsuccess- 
fully tracking leads, he has fi- 
nally trailed his former com- 
panion back to Tatooine, where 
he is operating under the false name of Dr. 
Cornelius. 


Personality: Gruff and intimidating. Ponda 
Baba is always itching for a fight, normally 
with those who appear smaller and weaker 
than he. He is greedy, cruel and altogether 
despicable. Since Ponda cannot speak Basic, 
he often starts a fight regardless of what re- 
sponse he receives. After his incident with 
Kenobi, he is now very leery of lightsabers. 


Objectives: To hunt down Dr. Evazan and kill 
him. Nothing else matters at this point. Of 
course, the million credit bounty on Dr. 
Evazan's head will be nice too. 


A Quote: “Neggrh ghogola woldewa!" <<I don't 
like your face. Want to fight?>> 


with nausea for five minutes; trying to do anything 
other than crawl suffers a penalty of -3D). If any of 
the characters are overcome with nausea, they are 
attacked by another pack of womp rats. They can 
attempt to wait until the fumes disperse, or they 
can actively try to pump it out. Perhaps they can 
reach the environmental controls to see if one or 
two blowers are functional. 

When the characters finally arrive at the for- 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas ooo T PA Ren 
ARST 


The Doctor will mention to the Jawa that the 
“messenger” he sent by yesterday was “delight- 
ful.” If the characters ask, the Jawa will seem 
evasive about the situation — ultimately, by 
asking around the city, perhaps street people, 
shop owners and so forth, they will learn that 
Kieth was the messenger (he agreed to drop off 
some parts in order to save a few credits on the 
deal — it was the Squib's idea). What neither 
Kieth nor the Squib knew was that Dr. Cornelius 
would somehow subdue him and perform experi- 
ments on him, burying the body in the caves 
below Mos Eisley. 


Episode Two: Eventually the characters learn 
Dr. Cornelius’ street address, and will presum- 
ably decide to investigate (the city police have 
no interest in the case since Kieth wasn't a 
Tatooine resident). 

If the characters come during normal office 
hours, the receptionist is able to figure out what 
they were up to, and will only allow them to make 
an appointment for the next day. lf they leave an 
address, the place they are staying at will be 
ransacked at some point in the adventure. lt is 
suggested that the group return after hours to 
investigate. The office shows signs of recent 
activities: there are stains on smocks and the 
tools have not been cleaned. 

The medical files on the computer relate sto- 


mm Coral Ohah of Sleeft Docking Bay Maintenance 


ward hold, they learn that the cargo was a ship- 
ment of power fusion crystal chips, used to regu- 
late fusion generators. Removing the chips will 
be quick and safe, and perhaps there is even a 
chance for the characters to make amends with 
their rivals. In addition, Notsub will give a 500 
credit bonus to each group which helped unload 
the chips. 


The Edge of Fashion 


A friend of the characters, Kieth Cairn, has 
disappeared after a medical visit to the Cutting 
Edge clinic. It seems that Doctor Cornelius has 
slipped up once too often 


Episode One: A friend of the characters named 
Kieth Cairn calls on them while he is in port. He 
wants to meet them to discuss a new contract, 
family business or some other plausible explana- 
tion. He explains that he has some things to do 
before the meeting, including a stop at the Jawa 
Traders Droid shop, but after that he will meet 
them. However, he doesn’t appear. 

The characters will probably turn suspicious 
and investigate Jawa Traders. There, they will 
encounter the Squib and Jawa owners of the 
shop. While the characters are there, Dr. Cornelius 
will stop by to pick up a few “Droid” parts that will 
be used for his evil cyborging experiments. 


mm The infamous Dr. Evazan/Cornelius 


92 Mos Eisley 


—TAR ===. re Adventure Ideas 


"WA! 


ries of horror. Files have many personal notes 
scattered throughout, telling how Cornelius dis- 
posed of bodies and other gruesome details. The 
characters can easily find the file dealing with the 
death of Kieth. 

A medical Droid is sitting in a corner, 
seemingly deactivated. But it suddenly 
comes to life and begins prepping 
for an operation, Taking a 
closerlook,itisobviousthat , 
the Droid's olfactory and / 
visual electronics have 
been ripped out of its / 
head, but it is ready 
to go after the char- / 
acters, ta 


Episode Three: | 
The characters, A 
have discovered is / ? 
the gruesome truth <, 
— what they want to > 
do about the goings- 
on is their business. The 
police, upon hearing proof, will 
opt to investigate. Meanwhile, Dr. Cornelius will 
attempt to hunt them down —a night-time fight 
in the alleys of Mos Eisley would make a suitable 
dramatic conclusion. For added suspense, Ponda 
Baba, Dr. Cornelius’ former Aqualish compan- 
ion, confronts the doctor in the interest of re- 
venge. 


A Bith Saved Is A Bith Learned 

A Sleeft Docking Bay Maintenance freighter 
was checked out by a Bith named Angor Farn. He 
accidentally got the wrong ship: the cargo is a 
load of high-quality Droid parts, stolen from one 
of Armanda Durkin's warehouses by Sleeft. While 
Sleeft hired Angor to take a cargo of power con- 
vertors to the Corellian system, he hit thejackpot 
with this load of Droid parts. Angor Farn has not 
only found the parts, but has decided to skip 
town with them. 

To do that, he needs to change the transpon- 
der signal. Thus, he is visiting the Dim-U monas- 
tery. The Sleeft company knows where he went, 
but not why (they are unaware of the monastery's 
true nature). Angor has contacted Armanda with 
an offer to sell the Droid parts in order to get 
some liquid credits. Armanda suspects that Angor 
is trying to sell back her own cargo. Angor's ship 
is stationed at Docking Bay 31 while he waits for 
the new transponder code or the money from 
Armanda. Armanda is playing the scene cau- 
tiously because she knows that she can't openly 
buy the parts from Angor without alerting Sleeft 
that she is involved in piracy and purchasing 
black market parts. Armanda also wants to find 
proof that Sleeft is responsible for these actions 


Mos Eisley 


against her. 


Episode One: Coral Ohah, one of the directors 
of Sleeft Docking Bay Maintenance, contacts the 
characters. Coral tells them a high-level corpo- 

rate partner of Sleeft has been kidnapped, a 
Bith named Angor Farn. Because of 
the nonviolent, pacifistic na- 
ture of Biths, he clearly will 
notattempttoescape 
— and might actu- 
allyimpedehisown 

rescue in the 


™\ hopes of work- 
Þing out an eg, 
uitable and 
peaceful ar- 


A 7 
— rangement. Nev- 
ertheless, he is in pos- 
session of information which 


must not fall into the hands of 
competitors. Coral hints that the com- 
petition is notorious for their brainwash- 
ing and interrogation techniques 

He is being held at the Dim-U Monastery, pos 
sibly without the monastery's knowledge. So 
Coral wants to hire the characters to infiltrate 
and comb the place for Angor. Coral will go in 
with them, 


Episode Two: The characters can pose as 
Bantha purchasers, new converts or perhaps 
fellow ecology buffs devoted to saving the natu- 
a habitat of the Bantha — whatever gets them 
ss to the monastery. Once inside, the char- 
een split up and wander around, while 
Coralapproaches the abbot. The characters soon 
discover that there is more to the Dim-U than 
meets the eye, but soon Coral reappears and 
herds everyone out. Clearly an assault is war- 
ranted: Angor is inside, but will soon be moving. 
Time is of the essence. 


Episode Three: Coral wants to attack an hour 
later. Depending upon the characters’ tactics, 
the monks and nuns may defend, or simply flee. 
Drayk destroys the database if it appears to be in 
jeopardy and takes off. Coral finds Angor, and the 
characters carry him out. Coral privately de- 
briefs Angor. He learns of the Bith’s attempted 
betrayal, and finds out where the freighter is 
docked. He also learns that Armanda’s security 
guards are preparing to confiscate the ship since 
Drayk has probably informed Notsub what Coral 
has done. 

Coral returns to the characters, pays them, 
and offers another story and another job pro- 
posal: the ship is being guarded by the *riff-rati" 
who originally kidnapped the Bith, and the ship 
must be retrieved before the valuable cargo can 
be sold. Of course, the ship is actually being 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas =" PA Pis 
m rm 


guarded by undercover Notsub guards (Armanda 
requires undercover guards so she can hide her 
involvementin this caper). The freighter is about 
to leave, so the characters must blast into the 
bay and take off, landing at specific coordinates 
far to the south of Mos Eisley. They will be met by 
asquad of Sleeft security, who will pay them and 
take the ship; they will be given a private trans- 
port so they can sneak back into Mos Eisley 
unnoticed. 


Episode Four: Unaccompanied by Coral, but 
with Angor, the characters break into the bay, 


but haveto fight through the small guard comple- 
ment and take off without clearance. 

Once the craft is airborne, they are attacked 
by a pair of Mos Eisley's cloud cars, and then 
after they are fended off, a pair of Notsub Z-95 
Headhunters take to the air after them. The char- 
acters are likely outgunned and outclassed. Once 
they are forced down, Angor explains to the 
characters and Armanda what really happened. 
Armanda declares that she will take the Droid 
parts, and the ship as payment. But she offers the 
characters a cargo run or some other job as away 
to repay the deceptions of Coral. 


eee 


94 


Mos Eisley 


STAR WARS 


GALAXY GUIDE. 7 


MOS EISLEY 


by Martin Wixted 


Come explore the infamous pirate spaceport city of 
Mos Eisley. Pounded by the relentless twin suns of 
Tatooine, Mos Eisley is host to some of the most 
famous (or infamous) smugglers and criminals in the 
galaxy! 

Made famous by the exploits of Han Solo and the 
treachery of Jabba the Hutt, Mos Eisley is the ultimate 
adventuring locale for fans of the Star Wars movies. 

This book provides a complete overview of this out- 
law city. It contains detailed location descriptions, 
with maps, gamemaster character descriptions and 
illustrations. Includes introductory chapters describ- 
ing the history of Tatooine and Mos Eisley! 


nd one or more players. 
s 12 and up. 


©, '* & © 1993 Lucasfilm, Lid. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. 
Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


WEST = 


