e esi 
is » 
eer — 
L| " " v 
r 3 ~ ye le 
c "an dol 
L ^" / 4 
* di d à ! (yj 
: 91 AM VU 
$ N , hin W " vi P" 
> 3 , at wit 
;: K 4 um ie am c 
E Ó A 
~ f 
` f | 
A i A- 
; / sy | 
L | 
2 
£ | 
d ] / miti = f 


miii 


\ 


cc 


TECHNOLOG YOR 


Qd 


GALLADINIUM'S 
FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 


by Rick D. Stuart 


Additional Material: Dennis F. Belanger, Douglas M. Burck, Matthew Cunningham, Jason 
Davis, Adam Dickstein, Greg Dove, Scot Eddy, Spencer E. Hart, Dale Jackson, Mike Kogge, 
Mark McElroy, Tom Neville, Adam Rosenberg, Matthew Silvia, Bill Smith, Elizabeth Stuart, 

Jim Tews, Eric Trautmann, Michael Zebrowski *« Development and Editing: Bill Smith 

Graphics: Tim Bobko * Interior Art: Matt Busch, David Deitrick, Robert Duchlinski, Brian 
Schomburg, Christina Wald * Playtesting and Advice: Greg Farshtey, Miranda Horner, Peter 
Schweighofer, Ron Seiden, Ed Stark 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter « Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter * Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran 
Senior Editor: Greg Farshtey * Editors: Miranda Horner, Peter Schweighofer, Bill Smith, Ed Stark ù Art Director: Stephen Crane 
Graphic Artists: Tim Bobko, Steven Brown, Tom ONeill, Brian Schomburg * Sales Manager: Bill Olmesdahl 
Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden * Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill Accounting: Karen Bayly, Wendy Lord, Kimberly Riccio 
Billing: Amy Giacobbe 


Published by 


VWWIWEST 
END 
GAMES . 
RR 3 Box 2345 


Honesdale PA 18431 
40025 


&, TM and © 1995 Lucasfilm Ltd (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


introduction 


INTRODUCTION 


Fantastic Technology is intended for use with Star 
Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition. This supple- 
ment provides gamemasters and players with examples 
of the many different rare and exotic technological items 
available in a galaxy where droids, energy weapons and 
hyperdrives are commonplace. 


THE FANTASTIC TECHNOLOGY 
CONTEST 


In this book, you may notice "Design" credits, with an 
indication of a finishing place (3rd place, 15th place, 
honorable mention, etc.). These entries were submitted 
to West End as part of a contest sponsored by the Role 
Playing Game Association Network™ (RPGA). 

West End would liketo thank the RPGA and especially 
Jean Rabe for allowing us to have this contest. In all, we 
received about 75 entries and nearly half of them were 
included in this book. West End would like to thank 
everyone who participated in this contest! | 

West End is aware that many of you have created your 
own devices (and starships and characters and just 
about everything else that goes into a Star Wars cam- 
paign). We must point out that West End Games cannot 
accept or read unsolicited materials from our readers. 
These submissions were accepted as part of a contest. 


THIS DATALOG 


The galaxy contains thousands of planets, species, 
and cultures. It is impossible to provide a complete 
compendium of all the items these diverse civilizations 
produce. Rather, this collection represents a fraction of 
the many different and unusual finds waiting to be 
discovered. What is presented are examples of the vari- 
ous weapons, Imperial trade goods, select personal 
wares, and other specialized devices that can be pur- 
chased or otherwise acquired by player characters and 
their opponents. 

Many of the following items have direct use in game 
play situations, while others are included as ^window 
dressing." Such items can be incorporated into the 
background of your Star Wars adventures to give players 
a true sense of "a galaxy far, far away." They fill out the 
larger civilization and culture that the characters in- 


AR. 
ARS" 


habit. Of course, any inventive group of characters will 
find a way to use mundane items to their advantage. 

Some devices may serve as the focus of a particular 
story situation: a trader's cargo, a hijacked shipment, a 
gift of special diplomatic or political significance, or a 
tool for accomplishing an adventure goal. Sometimes, 
however, these items can serve as rewards for a job well 
done. 

This book contains descriptions of each device, includ- 
ing game statistics, and where appropriate, sidebars illus- 
trating howthe device can be incorporated into game play. 


TIMELINE 


The publication of this datalog (and the availability of 
items within it) is meant to reflect the time between Star 
Wars: A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back. Most items 
described can be used in later time periods, as shown in 
the various Star Wars: The New Republic game supple- 
ments. The gamemaster may have to revise price and 
availability guidelines, or may even introduce newer, more 
advanced versions of a given device. 


SPECIAL OFFERINGS AND NON-CATALOG 
OFFERINGS 


Care should be taken when incorporating 
Galladinium's "special offerings" or "non-catalog offer- 
ings" in the back of this supplement. Many of the items 
described inthese sections are examples of rare or hard- 
to-find technology that would impress even the most 
jaded collector — in essence, they are "treasures" that 
should be remarkable and unique. 


A TECHNOLOGY POLICY 


Technology is an integral part of the Star Wars uni- 
verse, but uncontrolled technological advancement is 
dangerous to game balance and may hamper the "Star 
Wars feel" you'll want to convey in your adventures. The 
following suggestions are guidelines for a reasonable 
"technology policy" in your Star Wars adventures. 

First off, Star Wars is not a "technologically-oriented" 
game where new devices are the only way to save the 
day. Rather than having each adventure solved by some 
new technological trinket (with accompanying pseudo- 


Role Playing Game Association "Network" and RPGA are trademarks of TSR, Inc. © 1995 TSR, Inc. 


2 


Fantastic Technology 


anb | A Poo ——————————UmÁ———  —í—'! M Introduction 
RE Te 


scientific-techno-babble), characters rely on their wits. 
They use technology as “taken for granted” tools. Star 
Wars is a universe where technology is common, well- 
known and well-used — innovations are the exception 
rather than the rule. 

This is essential to the spirit of the game. Introducing 
newer, more advanced items has a tendency to trigger a 
“galactic arms race.” The characters become unimpor- 
tant because the game revolves around newer and newer 
devices. The game will barely be recognizable as Star 
Wars. 


AVOIDING TECHNOLOGY OVERKILL 


Simply put, once an item is introduced, it can never be 
taken back. While not every group of characters will 
abuse technology, it is best to assume the worst and let 
the characters prove that they will use devices respon- 
sibly. Assume that once characters learn that a device — 
any device, from Death Stars to force shields — may 
exist in the Star Wars universe, they will get their hands 
on such a device and abuse it to such an extent that no 
one can stand against them. 

The result is called “power gaming” and it’s not at all 
desirable. Such devices if they exist at all (and some 
things just shouldn't exist in Star Wars) must be so 
controlled, so rare and probably so fundamentally flawed 
or dangerous as to be useful only for a very specific, one- 
time only use. 

Keep in mind that just because a person can possibly 
obtain a particularly powerful piece of technology, it 
does not necessarily follow that he or she must automati- 
cally be provided with it. For this reason, gamemasters 
should again feel free to adjust availability and prices. 

This is not to suggest that Star Wars technology 
should stand still. Rather, Star Wars technology, just like 
in the real world, evolves. Technological breakthroughs 
that fundamentally alter the nature of the Star Wars 
universe are rare; new products with incremental im- 
provements are commonplace. 

Consider Luke’s comment that his landspeeder hasn’t 
been in demand ever since the new XP-38 landspeeders 
came out. Or, consider the introduction of the new A- 
wing, B-wing and TIE interceptor fighters in Return of the 
Jedi. Each of these new devices is slightly better than the 
devices that came before it: À-wings are faster than X- 
wings, but they have weak hulls so they can't take the 
punishment that an X-wing can. TIE interceptors are 
faster and have better weapons, but “common” TIE/Ins 
still have a role in the Imperial Navy. New ships may be 
faster, but they are also considerably more expensive, 
temperamental (especially ifthey use experimental tech- 
nology) and the demand for them probably far outstrips 
the supply (keeping the price high). 

In your adventures, it is fine to introduce incremental 
changes in technology over time. Two or three years 
(game time) into a campaign, the characters may be able 
to get their hands on blasters that have better range or 
more ammo capacity ... but don’t give them blaster 
pistols that do 6D damage! 


NEW DEVICES 


Hopefully, the reader will appreciate the sheer magni- 
tude of different technological devices within the Em- 
pire. Remember that this datalog represents only the 
slightest scratch along the surface of what is possible in 
the Star Wars universe. So where does one go from here? 

Gamemasters are encouraged to use Fantastic Tech- 
nology as a reference for creating new devices. Follow 
the guidelines for equipment construction found in the 
Star Wars Gamemaster Handbook, pages 69-79. Always 
keep in mind that any new invention must have a ratio- 
nale. 

When designing new technology, it is tempting to give 
in to player demands for wildly exotic devices capable of 
extending their capabilities by leaps and bounds. Giving 
in to this temptation leads to problems. 

If the gamemaster allows technology to get out of 
control, all is not lost. There are always forces beyond 
the characters’ control. Perhaps a group of social dissi- 
dents has had enough of the characters flaunting their 
super-powered equipment in their faces. Characters 
may suddenly find themselves very unpopular the next 
time they parade their hardware in the open! 

Financial constraints are always handy. Devices wear 
out — repairs or replacements can be expensive, or no 
one locally may have the knowledge to fix the device 
even if the money is available. 


JURY-RIGGING FANTASTIC 
TECHNOLOGY 


(The following rules replace the first edition rules pre- 
sented in Cracken’s Rebel Field Guide) 


This datalog presents only the finest specialized ex- 
amples of technology currently available within the 
Empire. Of course, some characters will still attempt to 
do the designer one better. 

Many of the items depicted in this datalog reflect new 
advances in technological concepts not generally known 
to the average mechanic — even the most adept techni- 
cian would be hard-pressed to improve new technology. 


PERMANENT ADVANCES 


Permanent enhancements to equipment are not cov- 
ered in these pages. For more information, see the 
description of the various repair skills on pages 86-91 of 
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition. More 
powerful enhancements are the province of the ad- 
vanced engineering skills (indicated with an (A) in game 
Statistic listings), which will be detailed in a future 
supplement. 


JURY-RIGGING ADVANCES 


"Jury-rigging" is a term used to described quick and 
often haphazard “improvements” enterprising charac- 
ters attempt to perform. The improvements are often 
temporary, and when they fail the results are often 
spectacular (if not painful). 


Fantastic Technology 


Introduction ——————nnÁ——s—— áá——'/ ——————MsÓ E A Da 
x e —————————————— a 


ARS™ 


Item availability codes are used to represent the 
idea that some items are hard to find while others are 
commonplace; some items are legal just about every- 
where, while others may be strictly regulated by 
Imperial or local governments. 

The gamemaster can use the following standard 
codes to determine whether or not to legalize or have 
available certain goods. 

Using item availability is a good way to control a 
certain device — a blaster that does a lot of damage is 
not much use if the characters can’t get their hands on 
one or if they will end up in jail for a long time if they’re 
caught with it. 

Please note that these codes are generalizations: 
local variations apply quite often. Some devices will 
be illegal on a specific world (or in a certain city) 
while being legal just about everywhere else; on the 
other hand, there are a number of “outlaw” worlds 
where just about everything is legal, including items 
that have an availability code of “X.” The gamemaster 
should feel free to adjust local circumstances and 
item codes as desired. 


Availability Codes 
] Readily available throughout the galaxy. 


2 Available only in large cities and 
spaceports. 


Whena character jury-rigs a bomb or alters the design 
of an airspeeder's mechanical flaps, he is making the 
item or machine better — but by means that no honest 
engineer would ever use. Jury-rigging something takes 
one hour, or the character can rush, jury-riggingthe item 
in one minute, although the task becomes one difficulty 
harder. Very Difficult or Heroic tasks require a full hour 
— the character cannot perform the task in less time. 

If the roll to jury-rig something is failed, it can be tried 
again, but the second try always takes an hour. 


IMPROVING EXISTING ABILITIES 


The most common way to jury-rig an item is to im- 
prove one ofits existing die codes. For example, a blaster 
can be rigged for better damage or an airspeeder can be 
rigged for better maneuverability. 

An item can be made better by «1D, +2D or +3D. Thus, 
a sporting blaster's damage can be increased from 3D+1 
to 4D«1, 5D«1 or 6D+1. Jury-rigging requires a repair roll 
(the specific skill varies: blaster repair for blasters; 
repulsorlift repair for speeders, etc.). If the character 
does not have the appropriate skill, they can use their 
Technicalattribute. The difficulty depends on how much 
the die code is being improved. 

Starship and vehicle speeds can also be improved 


ITEM AVAILABILITY 


3 Specialized item, normally available only 
on planet of origin. 


4 Rare item, difficult to find anywhere 


mr 


Fee or permit often required for purchase. 


R Restricted on most planets, and normally 
may not be bought or sold without 
appropriate [Imperial or other relevant 
license. 


X Illegal on most planets. Possession and use 
often violates Imperial or local laws except 
for specially authorized individuals; 
penalties may be severe. 


A Note on the Black Market: Almost any F, Ror X 
item is available if you're willing to go through the 
black market. Black market opportunities are rare, 
and the purchase may take some time or involve 
addditional dangers. Also, black market items tend 
to be of inferior quality, and are always at least triple 
the price listed. 

As noted, some items may be restricted or illegal 
onagiven planet without the code appearing for that 
item. For example, any weapon on Alderaan — a 
pacifist planet — would be illegal. If so, there will 
surely be a black market for that item. 

For more information on the operation of black 
markets, see pages 64-70 of Galaxy Guide 11: Criminal 
Organizations and pages 19-23 of Galaxy Guide 6: 
Tramp Freighters, Second Edition. 


with jury-rigging rolls (permanent enhancements are 
explained on pages 30-43 of Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp 
Freighters, Second Edition). 

Starships make improvements to their Space speed; 
use the conversion chart on page 110 of Second Edition 
to determine the ship's new atmosphere speed. Each +1 
improvement increases the Space speed by one. For 
example, «1 improvement to a ship with a Space speed 
of 5 means the ship now has a Space of 6. By using the 
chart on page 110 of Second Edition, the gamemaster 
would find out that the ship's atmosphere speed auto- 
matically goes from 295; 850 kmh to 330; 950 kmh. 

Airspeeders makeimprovements to their Move speed. 
Todeterminethe speed increase, usethe "Speed Codeto 
Move Conversion Chart" on page 165 of Second Fdition. 
For each +1, go down the chart one row to find the new 
speed. For example, if the characters have alandspeeder 
with a Move of 70; 200 kmh, a «1 improvement would 
mean the landspeeder now goes 80; 230 kmh! 


EQUIPMENT FAILURE 
Jury-rigged equipment has a chance of failure. The 
more a piece of equipment is pushed past its original 
design specifications, the greater the chance of failure. 


Fantastic Technology 


JURY-RIGGING DIFFICULTIES 


Improved Die Code 
+] 
+2 
+3 
44% 


Improved Space/Atmosphere Code 


Difficulty 
Moderate 
Difficult 
Very Difficult 
Heroic 


* Vehicles only; starships may not be improved by +4. 


When someone is using a jury-rigged piece of equip- 
ment, use the following rules. 

Make sure that the character’s Wild Die and bonus 
dice (from the modification) are different colors from 
the “normal” dice the player is using for the skill or 
damage roll. Jury-rig bonus dice must always be used. 

First, the gamemaster should determine what type of 
modification has been used: Weapon (for any weapon or 
anything that’s ben turned into a weapon by modifica- 
tion; formerly called “Lethal” in Cracken’s Rebel Field 
Guide), Vehicle (for starships and vehicles) or Non- 
Lethal (for anything else, like jetpacks, datapads, sen- 
sors and so forth). 

Whenever the player rolls a 1 on the Wild Die while 
using the jury-rigged device, the gamemaster should roll 
ID secretly. If the device has been modified for “bonus 
dice" (+1D, +2D or +3D), roll these bonus dice separately; 
if any of these bonus dice come up as a 1, have the 
gamemaster roll 1D secretly for each “1” result as well. 
Apply the worst result rolled on the table. 

For vehicles and starships, have a player roll 1D for 
each +1 (although this bonus is not added to the skill 
roll). 

If any of these run-in die rolls come up as a “1,” the 
gamemaster must check for a jury-rig breakdown as 
explained above. 


WEAPON 


| The weapon explodes, doing damage 
equal to the amount of the jury-rig bonus. 


2 The weapon is broken and cannot be 
repaired. 


3 The weapon stops working, but need only 
be slammed hard against something to 
work again. It takes an action to do this. 


The item is fine. 


VEHICLE 


| All power systems shut down and the 
vehicle drops like a stone. A Moderate 
piloting roll for the vehicle is necessary 
for a safe emergency landing, otherwise 
the vehicle crashes. 


2 The vehicle bucks. An Easy piloting roll is 
necessary to keep the vehicle from 
careening out of control. 


3 The vehicle suffers a temporary power 
loss (maintains speed and heading for 
this round). The problem is fixed if the 
pilot kicks or hits one random control 
panel; it takes an action to do this. 


4—6 The vehicle is fine. 


NON-LETHAL 


] The item is broken and cannot be 
repaired. 


2  Theitem stops working, but need only be 
slammed hard against something to work 
again. It takes an action to do this. 


3-6 
CYBERNETICS AND PROSTHETICS 


Cybernetics and prosthetics are one of the many 
wonders of the Star Wars universe. However, there is a 
terrible price to be paid for those who would replace 
tissue with metal and plastic. "Cybered" characters face 
serious prejudice from many who feel that it is wrong to 
turn one’s selfinto a machine. In other words, characters 
can choose to become “cybered to the artificial gills.” 
but there is a financial, social and emotional cost in- 
volved. 


The item is fine. 


ENHANCEMENT COSTS 


The formula for enhancement costs remains the same. 
except the character pays only for skills that the charac- 
ter has above the attribute. 

In other words, it is much cheaper to buy an enhance- 
ment before the character has built up high skill codes. 


TEMPTATION OF EVIL 


Characters with cybernetics are especially suscep- 
tible to the temptations of the dark side of the Force. 
Cybernetics reduce a person's empathy with other be- 
ings; what was oncea "clearly evil" action can very easily 
become a "justifiable" (but still evil) action. 

When a character would normally receive a single 
Dark Side Point for committing evil, cybernetically en- 
hanced characters receive extra Dark Side Points, has- 
tening their rush to embrace the dark side. 

When applying the rules below, make note that these 
are for cybernetic enhancements; if the character has 


GREG OMS CN C T--—-R pa eU DmNRUUM CU M EE CEENCLRIC UM CD I T —dKob a D C C———'n €— n — P ——d——Á —À———— H— n — MÀ o € À un— € À—— o — € Ó— M € ED UU EEUU CP I MUN EE RR MU 


Fantastic Technology 


5 


Introduction m——————— i A Dra 
ec, ee | 


ARS™ 
only cybernetic replacements, consider two replace- Note that these rules will not have much of an effect 
ments to be the equivalent of one enhancement. on non-Force-sensitive characters, since they only re- 

Number of Extra ceive Dark Side Points when the commit evil and use a 
Number of Dark Side Points Force Point. However, for Force-sensitive characters, 
Enhancements Received who receive Dark Side Points whenever they commit 
evil, these rules will require them to be ever-vigilant and 
1-2 +] to act with good intentions or risk going over to the dark 

3-4 +2 side. 
B. 43 However, as noted in the sidebar “Dark Side Charac- 


ters” on page 57 of Second Edition, characters who are 
swayed to the dark side will soon find that the dark side 
demands much more than it offers. 


6 Fantastic Technology 


o^ BALLAMNIUM GALLABNNIUM B 


GALLADINIUM’S GALACTIC 
DATALUG UF FANTASTIC 
TECHNulusY 


TABLE GF CUNTENTS 


In EPOGOUGEIOT esos De uite ta E uiss rox tar r E aa a e 
Welcome To Galladinium «osioioieet elo S éea a a vb RED OX EENSET vOlSE REI UU E EOS 8 
DohnVeyall6eB: cecidisse cn ure vds d tesa ioc dent A Destin dx EVI ÉnNEE 11 
Bipolar TE D D DL LL LU 20 
For Home- OF: OMGe «zio ase PE dYWEMS PRU XE EDDA E REERFEBV NEUE TRU FUNK Or ION Rm ea 
YII eT ——————À 34 
IVIEGIGING osos tii eR eheu a E m E Sad praises 38 
Personal Gift Id88S ncscias i dnep oia ia Palsenipe cta AV id Ure d Uva d d peu ae 
Recreation ooa ciae id hewneereesocee teres caer mee du MAE RENDUM 48 
Special Tero d o3 
ourveilllatice and SUCH .«escites tacens inus vx Rea eR DAVE VERAM E Ee i vue Eds 60 
Travel PIGS uo pau itl EE T hantmananewa PIE ONU cS Eden D: 64 
Weapons and SelF-Derense oda ie eoo px oU RE MObx n Pel er PEU DERE: 68 
Special Insert: Special Offerings ...............:ccceceeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeenenaes 85 
Non-Gatalog Offerings ios tite crime cinsieniienermieticvetiaaaaenienceniaae’s 93 


Fantastic Technology 7 


EB ^ B GALLAMNIUM GALL AINNILIM 


WELCOME TO GALLADINIUM 


Welcome to the 50th anniversary edition of Galladinium's Galactic Datalog of 
Fantastic Technology. For 50 standard years, the executives and employees of 
Galladinium Galactic Exports have dedicated themselves to bringing you the very 
finest in Imperial technology. We at Galladinum are proud of our reputation for 
supplying our customers with only the highest quality merchandise. Since 
openingits doors, Galladinium has spared no expense in searching the far corners 
of the galaxy for rare and exotic technology in keeping with your expectations of 
high performance and good taste. 

Ranging the gamut from servant droids to personal defense items, from luxury 
speeders to gigantic sun jammers, this datalog truly has something for everyone. 

Take some time to browse through this special 50th edition illustrated datalog. 
We think you'll find that we at Galladinium Exports offer the very finest technology 
available to the Empire's citizens. At the very least, this datalog serves as a unique 
testimony to the many marvels of Imperial scientific research and development. 


ORDERING INFORMATION 


Orders for merchandise found in this datalog can be placed through your 
system or regional distribution office at any time. Visitors are encouraged to visit 
our main datalog showroom in Hreas Port City, Basin continent, Lenthalis, Secossi 
system. 

Here you can test out any of the items shown in this datalog without obligation. 
Please note that special arrangements must be made with regard to trial test 
flights of oribital conveyances. 

Those who prefer to shop via the convenience of their subspace transceivers 
may do so at any time of night or day. Simply access our datalog department by 
referencing the local communication network prefix and number indicated at the 
end of this file. Have your credit account numbers and destination coordinates 
available for the operator. 

shipping and handling charges for household delivery are a flat 10 percent of 
the total order, regardless of size. 

shoppers may elect to have materials shipped to a sector distribution center 
for later pick-up at a shipping and handling charge of only three percent. 

All orders of 300,000 credits or more are shipped without charge. 


PRODUCT LINE AVAILABILITY 


Às you browse through these pages, please bear in mind that merchandise 
availability is always subject to local conditions which may be beyond Galladinium's 
control. Due to pirates, astronomical phenomenon, Rebel activities and the 
everpresent dangers of interstellar space flight, shipments sometimes incur 
unavoidable difficulties. 

These rare disturbances notwithstanding, the officers and staff at Galladinium 
are so sure you will be pleased with our unique merchandise, as well as our 
commitment to service excellence, that each and every item in this datalog is 
backed by our exclusive guarantee of satisfaction. If, for any reason, you are 
dissatisfied with a purchase made from this datalog, simply return the item in its 
original shipping container within 10 standard days of receiving it and we will 
refund the purchase price and any shipping costs immediately. 


Fantastic Technology 


GAILIADINIUM GAI. 


LADINIUM Bi 


A WoRD FROM THE PRESIDENT 


They said it couldnt be done ... but Galladinium defied the 
odds. With hard labor and responsible sacrifice, in the space of five 
short decades Galladinium has become the galaxy's leading 
interstellar consumer datalog merchandiser. 

As we look to our next 50 years, it is appropriate to take a 
moment to reflect on how far we have come. We at Galladinium 
would be remiss if we did not pause to take stock of the sweeping 
social and political events currently shaping our galaxy. 

We at Galladinium have prospered under the Empire and have 
always sought to share that prosperity and scientific progress with 
others. To this end, we support the Empire's attempts to contain 
and eventually stamp out the Rebel threat to peace. To this end — 
through deeds and not Just words — with every order placed with 
our firm in the next 100 standard days, Galladinium will contribute 
five percent of the proceeds to the Imperial Defense Fund. Please 
keep this in mind when placing your next order. Remember who 
nas made that order possible. 


Illustrations by Mike Vilardi 


FUR GUR PREFERRED CUSTOMERS 

While Galladinium strives to provide quality merchandise to the largest number of customers possible, 
special care must also be taken to recognize the loyal support of discriminating individuals like 
yourselves. We at Galladinium would be remiss if we were to ignore the debt we owe our loyal 
customers. It is only through the continued support of our customers that Galladinium has been able 
to maintain its reputation for handling the very best in Imperial technology. 

In appreciation of your continued support, please find enclosed special coupons for discounts on the 
purchase of goods displayed in these datapages. It's Just another way of letting you know how much 
we value your continued patronage. When using these coupons be sure to include your Personal 
Customer Identification Number which appears below: 


FE908FD 908543LKFDSFDFD 
9065GFVCL KADSD 


In addition to offering discount coupons, this special edition datalog contains an insert of ' apse 
Offerings,” available exclusively to our most favored customers. 

This section contains items of particular rarity and value that will not be presented in the common 
version of this datalog made available to the general public. While the items depicted here are not for 
everyone (and they are not intended to be}, we are certain they will appeal to someone with your 
exceptionally good taste. 


Fantastic Technology 9 


Edi [77 


SAVE 15 % ON YOUR NEXT 
DROID PURCHASE 


SAVE 15% OFF THE PRICE OF YOUR PUR- 
CHASE OF ANY DROID SEEN IN THESE PAGES. 
THIS OFFER IS GOOD UNTIL THE PUBLICATION OF 
GALLADINIUM'S 51ST EDITION DATALOG. THIS 
COUPON MAY ALSO BE USED FOR THE PUR- 
CHASE OF DROID PROGRAMMING UPGRADES 
(HAVE PRIOR MODEL AND IDENTIFICATION REG- 
ISTRATION NUMBER ON HAND). 


Droid Make/Model: 

Droid ID/Reg #: 
Manufacturer: 
Programming Specifications: 
Datapage #: 

Personal Customer 
Identification Number: 


GLD908543 DHE EEE GCT 50 


SAVE 10 % ON YOUR NEXT 
WEAPON PURCHASE 


SAVE 10% OFF THE PRICE OF YOUR NEXT 
PURCHASE OF ANY WEAPON OR PERSONAL 
DEFENSE ITEM OVER 200 CREDITS. THIS COU- 
PON CAN ALSO BE USED FOR AN EQUAL DIS- 
COUNT ON ANY WEAPON AMMUNITION OR 
POWER CELL REPLACEMENTS IF THE TOTAL IS 
OVER 200 CREDITS. THIS OFFER IS GOOD UNTIL 
THE PUBLICATION OF GALLADINIUM'S 51ST 
EDITION DATALOG. WHERE REQUIRED, INDICATE 
LOCAL PERMIT ORDINANCE/LICENSE NUMBER. 


Weapon Make/Model: 
Manufacturer: 
Permit/Ordinance #: 
Datapage #: 

Personal Customer 
Identification Number: 


GLD908544 DHE EEE GCT 50 


10 


LADINIUM GAIL. ADINIUM 


SAVE 5 % ON YOUR NEXT 
CONVEYANCE PURCHASE 


SAVE 596 OFF THE PRICE OF YOUR NEXT 
PURCHASE OF ANY PERSONAL CONVEYANCE 
(OR ACCESSORY IN THAT SECTION) IN THIS 
DATALOG. THIS OFFER I8 GOOD UNTIL THE PUB- 
LICATION OF GALLADINIUM’S 51ST DATALOG 
EDITION. WHERE REQUIRED, PLEASE INDICATE 
MASTER PILOT'S LICENSE NUMBER BELOW. 


Conveyance Make/ Model: 
Manufacturer: 

Pilot Licence #: 

Datapage #: 

Personal Customer 
Identification Number: 


GLD908545 DHE EEE GCT 50 


MILITARY PERSONNEL SAVE 
10% ON ANY PURCHASE 


AS ANOTHER WAY OF SHOWING OUR SUP- 
PORT FOR THE EMPIRE, ALL MILITARY PERSON- 
NEL ORDERING FROM THIS DATALOG AUTOMATI- 
CALLY RECEIVE A SAVINGS OF 10% OFF THE PRICE 
OF THEIR NEXT PURCHASE. THIS SAVINGS AP- 
PLIES TO ANY ITEM LISTED IN THIS SPECIAL SOTH 
EDITION BUT MAY NOT BE USED IN CONJUCTION 
WITH ANY OTHER COUPON. SIMPLY INDICATE 
YOUR SERVICE, RANK AND IDENTIFICATION NUM- 


BER BELOW WHEN PLACING YOUR ORDER. 


Item Make/Model: 

Imperial Military Branch/Rank: 
Imperial Military Identification #: 
Datapage #: 

Personal Customer 
Identification Number: 


GLD908546 DHE EEE GCT 50 


Fantastic Technology 


GAL I. ADINIUM 


LUNV E YANLES 


With the increasing congestion and aggravation in- Smoothing back his ruffled hair, Vice-President Justahl 
volved in getting around these days, it's nice to know palmed a control panel along the outer wall. The 
that you can still get there in style. Anyone can offer you transparisteel window slid back to admit the almost-but- 


not-quite-late executive. He paused only a second to re- 
move the small jet pack and then the corporate magnate 
settled in his chair, pausing only to give his opponent a brief 


basic transportation but Galladinium Exports believes 
its customers deserve the very best in comfort, luxury, 
and uniqueness. After all, who wants to pilot the same but steely glance. He commenced as if nothing out of the 
thing everybody else does? At Galladinium we under- ordinary had occurred. 


stand that how you arrive is offen as | important as S see we' re all sse ibled Good nani A 
arriving in the first place. ee M 


m ARAKYD HUSH-ABOUT JET 


"It's really not like Justahl to be 
"No, it's not like him at all." 
"Certainly not for a me 
"Quite. Do you think he 
"He set the meeting up 
"Well, if he's not here in 
forfeit his share options t 
"Quite a pity don't yout 


probably seen pictures of the Empire's 
about on their specially designed jet 
ul villain. But why should the 
h a Hush-About from Arakyd 
freedom and exhilaration of 
action of what you thought the 


ut jet pack has a light-weight, 
eased portability. Specially de- 
auditory dampeners make this 
virtually soundless in operation. The 
for travel in any urban environment 
ces prohibit standard jet and rocket 
be amazed at how easy it is to operate. 


-] know what you mean. Oh, look : 
“Really? Where?” . 
“Outside the window.” 
“Stuff and poshtish. We're 200 meters sabove the grow 


“Apparently so is Justahl.” E Try a. Hush- About A nd you'll never be late for that cross- 
Outside a spectacled figure in the latest’ Dervaisi fash- | . tov ting as 

ioned suit slowly descended to the ledge. His jump jet com- ^-^ coming. a 

pensated nicely against the building's wind sheer at the last Model: Ard Added Inc. Hush-About AJP-400 

moment — precisely what was needed to complete the Type: Personal jet pack 


Skill: Jet pack operation 
Cost: 1,800, 150 (power pack recharge and coolant refill), 150 
(portable carrying case) 


illusion of effortless flight. 


EB Arakyd Hush-About AJP-400 EE /andraman DSP-5 


Illustrations by Christina Wald 


Fantastic Technology 11 


~ J| GALL ABINIUM 


JET PACK VERSUS ROCKET PACK: YOU DECIDE! 


While particularly impressed with the advanced 
soundiess design of the Hush-About, Galladinium 
continues to stock a variety of jet and rocket packs for 
all your personal transportation needs. À compara- 
tive listing of models is given below. 

When deciding which model best suits your par- 
ticular needs, consider the following: 


e Jet Packs. Most jet packs typically function by 
the use of an intake mechanism that pulls the sur- 
rounding atmosphere into the pack's ignition cham- 
ber. Arrays of miniaturized turbines combine minute 
amounts of fuel to produce the thrust for lift and 
maneuvering. Thrust generated bya single jet burst is 
controlled by a series of internal regulators that 
distribute the release of energy over a period of 
several seconds. Jet packs typically require a mini- 
mum “cool down time” of several seconds between 
individual turbine bursts, though the regulation of 
expelled energy during this time period gives the 
impression of continuous operation. 

Wrist or hand controls adjust the angle and pitch of 
both intake and exhaust vanes, allowing for vertical 
and horizontal flight. Setting exhaust vanes to oppose 
each other similarly produces a neutral hovering 
effect. Jet packs are subject to difficulties in zero, low 


Availability: 3, F or R (in most localities) 

Game Notes: This device is capable of lifting up to 300 kilograms 
(total). It moves vertically 200 meters per charge, horizontally up 
to 500 meters per charge. A fully powered unit has 10 charges and 
can be run on continuous charge-feed. During normal operation 
this unit produces very little. Any attempt to locate a Hush-About 
using auditory pickups requires a successful search roll at a +10 
penalty to the difficulty. 


m BITH VEHICLE VOICE LOCK 


The Bith Vehicle Voice Lock (BiVVoL) device is a com- 
puter module and locking system tied into a vehicle's main 
control computer and cross-linked to the main drive con- 
trol package. A hand-held voice recognition link is used to 
program a series of syllables into the deterrent control 
program; the computer can hold up to one minute of re- 
corded data. 

Thereafter, evenif security is breached and accesstothe 
main power system is achieved, the would-be thief must 
first be aware of the BiVVoL program in place, and secondly 
be able to supply the proper coded sequence before igni- 
tion and flight control systems can be brought on-line. 

It is difficult to forge this code short of using a sophisti- 
cated voice replicator capable of altering voice datato have 
the proper emphasis and tone. A failed attempt to fool a 
BiVVol results in a computer lock-out until proof of the 
owner is established through a second identification sys- 
tem. Theowner of the vehicle can customize the secondary 
identification system to datakeys or datachips, activation 
of a specific set of switches in the vehicle, activation of a 
specific computer sub-routine, or retinal, fingerprint or 
genetic code scans. 

One of the best features of a BiVVoL system is the fact 


12 


or high atmospheric pressures situations; they re- 
quire atmospheric gases to produce thrust. Should 
the intake mechanism become damaged or clogged, 
insufficient intake pressures will result in a sudden 
loss of altitude. 


* Rocket Packs. Rocket packs are self-contained 
units providing directed thrust from the regulated 
mixture of large amounts of combustible chemicals. 
They can operate in zero, low or high atmosphere 
situations because the rocket contains all of the 
necessary thrust components. 

Because of size and weight restrictions, rocket 
packs must incorporate rapid-burning elements, lim- 
iting flight duration. Moreover, if ruptured or other- 
wise damaged, the risk of leaking explosive chemi- 
cals poses a serious concern. 

This notwithstanding, rocket packs are typically 
faster than corresponding jet packs and are de- 
signed to provide a better "all-environment" flight 
capability. By comparison, jet packs are generally 
lighter and quieter to operate. 

Sometimes special flight requirements result in a 
hybrid of the two basic designs — one exampleis the 
Aratech Screamer, which is fundamentally a jet pack 
that uses additional solid fuel rocket boosters to 
allow for rapid altitude gains. 


that it is not widespread (yet!). Few thieves suspect this 
sophisticated a system and lack the knowledge to defeat its 
safeguards. They are quite useful in delaying a thief long 
enough for bystanders to notice a suspicious theft attempt 
and foil their plans. Ask your local insurer about discounts 
for theft insurance! 

Model: Casillis Electronic Defenses BiVVoL RVR- 325 

Type: Vehicle theft deterrent 

Skill: Streetwise 

Cost: 650 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: An Easy communications total is required to properly 
encode the BiVVoL or change an established pattern. Normal 
activation by the owner with a voice command code is automatic 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI.I. 


JET & ROCKET PACK MODELS IN STOCK 


Manufacturer/Model Cost’ Availability Charges Vertical? Horizontal? 


Jet Packs? 


Arakyd Hush-About AJP-400 1,800 3,ForR 
Arakyd Whisper" 400 3,F 
Aratech Jumper 200 2,R 
Aratech Screamer® 250 1 
Mitrinomon Z-6° 300 4, For R 
Merr-Sonn Leaper! 300 3,F 
Moreldahl Swiftsure 300 AR 
Nanogar NJP-433 400 2,R 


Rocket Packs? 


Aratech Whisper 
Jump Jet Pack!! 
Fersherid RPI Carrier 
Grehnohr DRPV-78'? 
Presentian PRP-100 
Zandraman DSP-5 


‘Price does not include fuel costs 

"Lift in meters per use 

?Carrying capacity in kilograms 
‘Weight of unit in kilograms 

"Requires jet pack operation skill 
“Requires rocket pack operation skill 
“P+” means “pilot plus” amount listed 


| CANT UNDERSTAND IT! 


The nice thing about a BiVVoL is that the aver- 
age criminal isn't patient enough to fool the sys- 
tem. It is possiblethatathief can obtain the owner's 
code sequence — perhaps under duress — but just 
knowing the sequence is not enough: the sequence 
must have the proper vocal tone and pitch ele- 
ments to be acceptable. 

A harried owner can even make a show of trying 
to figure out what’s wrong! Imagine an owner re- 
peating the code sequence over and over again, but 
to no avail. “I can't understand it! The darn thing 
must be broken! I can't even get it to turn off!” 

Eventually, the average criminal, lacking suffi- 
cient time or the mental resources to understand 
what's really going on, will give up and begin look- 
ing for easier marks. 


within a 10-meter range (ifthe owneris willing). The owner can alter 
the command sequence's tone to fail an activation if under duress. 
A failed attempt to circumvent a BiVVoL means that the vehicle's 
power system is disabled until the secondary system establishes 
identity. 

Attempting to "forge" a voice replication requires a voice replica- 
tion unit with sound adjustment functions, at least three hours of 
work creating the forgery, and a Moderate communications roll and 
a Moderate forgery roll. 


Fantastic Technology 


70 100 
80 180 
300 500 
75 170 
70 160 


*See page 43 of Cracken’s Rebel Field Guide 

See page 141 of the Star Wars Sourcebook, Second Edition 
See page 91 of Galaxy Guide 10: Bounty Hunters 

"Page 9 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 

Pages 31-32 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
PBPage 47 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition 


m HOVER SHOPPER 


Not everyone can afford to have a droid do one's shop- 
ping. There are those who enjoy wandering through com- 
mercial districts spending the entire day shopping their 
hearts out, but still find the crowds and bustle oppressive. 
There is no reason why a routine shopping jaunt should 
become an arduous affair. 

Now from Borliss Automotion comes the "hover shop- 
per" — a convenient way of maneuvering through crowded 
shops and stalls. With the hover shopper you can have an 
avian's-eye view of all the best mark-downs. And at the end 
of a busy shopping adventure, you can honestly say you 
were above it all. 

Craft: Borliss Automotion Concepts Incorporated HVP-200 
Type: One-person personal cargo carrier 

Scale: Character 

Length: 3 meters 

Skill: Hover vehicle operation 

Crew: 1 


13 


- [| G4LLADINIUM 


Crew Skill: Varies widely 

Cargo Capacity: 300 kilograms 

Cover: 1/4 

Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 
Cost: 400 

Availability: 3 

Maneuverability: +1 

Move: 20; 60 kmh 

Body Strength: 3D 


m HYPERFOIL 1000 


Young Prestor broke out of the cloud cover doing 200 
kilometers per hour. Once past the urban zone, he pushed 
the throttle forward, giving it all she could take. After 
playing tag with Dorqweull for a couple of clicks, he hauled 
back just enough to make a tight turn to the left. He waved 
to the young women as he blasted past their rooftops; the 
angry oaths of parental types were lost in the whine of 
protesting turbines. 

Prestor cooled downthe motor as he camein closetothe 
rooftop skimmer pad. Thumbing an auto relay, he watched 
as the rooftop slowly slid away. Hover jets cushioned the 
touchdown. 

“Hi, Dad. I’m back. Here's the evening faxsplat. By the 
way, feel free to ask meto run errands for you any time you 
want ..." 


The Hyperfoil 1000 from Tion Industries is a mixed-drive 
vehicle, making it a prize for the repulsorlift collector. The 
Hyperfoil 1000 combines repulsorlift drive systems with the 
latest in hovercraft technology. The result is a streamlined 
vessel that works equally well when it is moving vertically 
and horizontally. 

The hyperfoil uses hover engine lifters and repulsorlift 
boosters to provide a smooth, comfortable vertical lift off 
up to 50 meters in height. Once clear of ordinary obstruc- 
tions, the hyperfoil switches propulsion systems, relying on 
a more standard repulsorlift generator, with assistance 
from the hover generators for smoother flight over rough 
terrain or during sudden maneuvers. Top speed is nearly 
300 kilometers per hour. With its ability to move silently 
(under hover drives), hover, rise, descend, and minimal 
maintenance requirements, the hyperfoil is the ideal urban 
vehicle. 

Craft: Tion Industries, Civil Aeronautics Division Hyperfoil 1000 
Type: VTOL (Vertical TakeOff/Landing) speeder 
Scale: Speeder 

Length: 15 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation 

Crew: | 

Crew Skill: Varies widely 

Passengers: 2 

Cargo Capacity: 100 kilograms 

Cover: Full 

Altitude Range: Ground level-50 meters 

Cost: 12,500 (new), 7,000 (used) 

Availability: 3 

Maneuverability: 2D+2 

Move: 105; 300 kmh 

Body Strength: 2D+1 


m LIVE ORGANISM COMFORT CONVEYOR 


Moving from planet to planet is always an exercise in 
personal turmoil. Imagine what is must be like for your pets 
— uprooted from familiar surroundings, subjected to a 
cacophony of strange sounds, and asked to somehow “ad- 
just" to a new habitat after almost being left behind on the 
inward-bound shuttle connector! 

You may not be able to avoid travel, but now you can at 


14 


least minimize the anxiety for your four-, six- and eight- 
legged friends traveling with you. Offering the latest in 
portability, the custom designed Kolocast transport sys- 
tem does the job. Each Kolocast design includes an internal 
bio-scanner that monitors your animal's vital life functions. 
Micro-repulsor chips contained within interior linings cush- 
ion your pet in soothing pulsating waves, not unlike the 
stroking of an owner's hand. [n addition to the comforting 
repulsor field, heating/cooling, bio-system controls and 
food/water systems keep your pet as comfortable as pos- 
sible. Throughout the journey you can sit back and relax, 
knowing that safety monitors are keeping a close watch on 
your companion's condition. 

Once you've arrived at your new destination, you can 
release your pet to your waiting arms with a minimum of 
disruption to his life and yours. 

Model: Kolocast Consumer Goods T-P-C4 Live Organism Comfort 
Conveyor 

Type: Animal transport and containment system 

Cost: 300 (25 kilogram size), 500 (60 kilogram size), 800 (100 
kilogram size) 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Three different sizes available: small accommodates 
creatures up to 25 kilograms, medium up to 60 kilograms, and large 
up to 100 kilograms. Special orders can be made for larger needs. 


CUSTOMS OFFICIALS BEWARE! 


Smugglers are getting more inventive every day! 
Considerthelive organism comfort conveyor. Here 
is the perfect thing for moving that less-than- 
friendly-with-strangers animal from one planet to 
another. However, it's also a perfect way to smuggle 
contraband goods right under your nose! 

Many customs inspectors are easily taken in by 
appearances. Recently, arandom spot check aboard 
the luxury liner Alamintari, bound for the Outer 
Rim Territories, uncovered 10 kilos of rare 
Garcornian spice and a pre-recorded sound chip of 
a Breshig trill beast. Local ground officials never 
bothered to lookinside upon hearing the trill beast's 
growls emanating from inside the conveyor! 


m LUXURY SPEEDER 


Few persons like to go to work every day. At least now 
you can travel in style with the Astral-8 from zZip Motor 
Concepts. 

Forthose whoenjoy maximum comfort and roominess in 
a high-speed ground vehicle, the Astral-8's extra dimen- 


Fantastic Technology 


sions provide space for additional passengers and personal 
belongings. The Astral-8's new Replar-640 dynamic 
repulsorlift system gives added speed and maneuverabil- 
ity, just the thing for getting out of those really congested 
flight patterns in a hurry. For urban dwellers, the Astral-8 
also comes fully equipped with an automated anti-concus- 
sion shielding system that guards against the occasional 
dent and ding ... and protects equally well when confronted 
with the occasional civil disruption. 

If the competition could do it, they'd build an Astral-8. 
See what the competition wishes they had in stock. 
Craft: zZip Motor Concepts Astral-8 
Type: Luxury speeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 12 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: luxury speeder 
Crew: 1 
Crew Skill: Varies, but typically repulsorlift operation 3D 
Passengers: 8 
Cargo Capacity: 250 kilograms 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 
Cost: 25,000 (new); 18,000 (used); add 3,000 for shield system 
Maneuverability: 1D+2 
Move: 85; 245 kmh 
Body Strength: 4D 
Shields: 1D (physical only) 


gi METHANE SIFTER 


The methane sifter is specifically designed for use on 
planets with dense atmospheres rich in methane, ammonia 
and similar gases. This three-person runabout uses twin 
ramjet scoops to draw the local atmosphere into a com- 
pressed ignition chamber. The gasses are then burned to 
produce the energy needed for the large hover vanes. The 
result is an efficient, almost noiseless, surface vehicle that 
can go where more conventional repulsorcraft cannot. 
Craft: Bespin Motors Methane Sifter Ramjet 
Type: Exotic atmosphere hovercraft 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 15 meters 
Skill: Hover vehicle operation: methane sifter 
Crew: 2, skeleton: 1/+10 
Passengers: | 
Cargo Capacity: 150 kilograms (300 if no passenger on board) 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-3 meters 
Cost: 30,000 (new) 

Maneuverability: 1D 
Move: 75; 225 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D+1 


GAMEMASTER NOTE 


The methane sifter is a favorite of scouts and 
other deep space exploration teams. However, don't 
overlook the possibility of pirates, corporate op- 


eratives, mercenaries or Rebel factions using cap- 
tured sifters to negotiate what might otherwise be 
inhospitable terrain. These vehicles would be in- 
valuable at bases on planets with unbreathable 
atmospheres. 


m MICROWEIGHT 


For those who enjoy flying by the seat of their pants (and 
very little else), there's the microweight. This lightweight, 


uAI. 


one-person vehicle is perfect for delicate and discreet fly- 
ing. Specially designed polymer wings are coated with a 
sealer made from Bactriasan scarab cementing fluids, mak- 
ing the wings much tougher than they look. 

Used primarily as a recreational craft, the microweight 
can also be used as an emergency rescue vehicle. Its simple 
and compact construction allows it to be stored in the cargo 
areas of most other vehicles. For the closest thing to the 
actual power of flight, try out a microweight from Illiseni 
Aerodyne. 


Craft: Illiseni Aerodyne HobbyCraft Microweight 
Type: Ultra-light repulsor vehicle 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 2.1 meters long, 4 meter wingspan 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: glider 

Crew: 1 

Cover: 1/2 

Altitude Range: Ground level-300 meters 
Cost: 500 (new), 300 (used) 
Maneuverability: 3D 

Move: 80; 230 kmh 

Body Strength: 2D 


m PERSONAL VEHICLE COORDINATOR 


It's natural: people enjoy the exhilaration and freedom 
that comes from owning and driving their own vehicle. 
Regrettably, not everyone is a professional when it comes 
to actually controlling their vehicles. 

With this in mind, whether you are a novice driver or an 
expert, you can benefit from the personal vehicle coordina- 
tor (PVC). ThePVC connects directly into your conveyance's 
central drive computer. Once in place, data readouts are 
projected on the windshield, providing an overlay of the 
outside world complete with information on vehicle speed, 
course, and angle of inclination. Different coded visual and 
aural displays give warning of potentially dangerous situa- 
tions, as well as providing a direct link to your system's on- 
board navigational display. 

More than just an exotic form of information display, 
however, the PVC may be allowed to assert control over a 
vehicle to prevent a collision. With a reaction time that 


——— É———————————————————————  ——ÁG—— '—————————————————————————————————————— — 


Fantastic Technology 


15 


HYPERFOIL 1000 


LUXURY SPEEDER 


METHANE SIFTER 


TAGGECO. SCS-19 SENTINEL 


16 Fantastic Technology 


GALLADINIUM f 


exceeds that of most organic beings, this additional protec- 
tion is well worth the price. Happy Hovering! 

Model: Vewas Data Controllers PVC-800 

Type: Vehicle command controller 

Cost: 1,200 . 

Game Notes: Limited to vehicles under 10 meters long and under 10 
metric tons. Under normal situations, use of this device adds +1D 
to the appropriate vehicle operation skill. If so programmed by the 
owner, in emergency situations the PVC will automatically make 
evasive maneuvers to avoid a crash (allow the pilot +2D to the his 
or her operation roll to avoid collision — but the PVC will prevent 
unsafe maneuvers that Rebels so love to perform). 


m TAGGECO. SCS-19 SENTINEL 


The carrier rounded the corner with the shriek of pro- 
testing engines, its driver doing his utmost to put some 
distance between him and his pursuers. Behind the swiftly 
moving vehicle, first one, then two swoops dodged power 
poles and street lamps in an effort to overtake the carrier. 

Dodging blaster bolts with a skill born of countless 
similar encounters, the carrier’s driver shifted power to the 
right exhaust port while reversing thrust to the left exhaust 
port. The carrier swung into asharp turn, narrowly avoiding 
the Customs Building’s exterior. The motion of their pass- 
ing set off home-made vibro-mines placed in the alleyway 
the night before. 

The carrier emerged from the alley only to find an armed 
mob awaiting their arrival. Given the most likely outcome 
should they be forced down, the driver shifted emergency 
power to the forward shields and dropped the nose of the 
craft to a scant half-meter above ground. The driver would 
not let the protestors halt his progress ... 

Minutes later, the carrier settled quietly into its docking 
bay behind sealed blast doors. Having arrived safe and 
secure, the carrier's passenger disembarked to begin the 
work of another day. 

“Good morning, Governor. How was the trip this morn- 
ing?” 

“Pretty quiet for this time of year. What’s on the agenda 
for this morning, Revan?” 


Whether you re transporting precious commodities, very 
special personages, or you just want to make sure that you 


Fantastic Technology 


get where you're going in one piece, try TaggeCo.’s SCS-19 
Sentinel. Sleek and aerodynamic, it combines speed and 
maneuverability. This two passenger security carrier comes 
equipped with interior climate controls, auxiliary power 
supplies and on-board defensive shield systems. Whether 
you need to navigate through unexplored countryside ora 
more urban jungle, the Sentinel’s twin laser cannons supply 
an extra measure of personal safety. Available in a variety of 
colors, with a wide range of options to choose from. 
Craft: TaggeCo. SCS-19 Sentinel 
Type: Personal security conveyance 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 12 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: airspeeder 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 2 
Cargo Capacity: 50 kilograms 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-20 meters 
Cost: 50,000 (new); 30,000 (used) 
Maneuverability: 2D+1 
Move: 280; 800 kmh 
Body Strength: 4D 
Shields: 1D 
Weapons: 
Twin Laser Cannon (fire-linked) 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 20-100/150/250 
Damage: 3D+1 


m SUB-ORBITAL LUXURY SHUTTLE 


The next time your plans call for space flight, don’t rely 
on someone else. Leave when you want to. Try using your 
own luxury shuttle, completely stocked with all the com- 
forts you’ve come to expect when you travel. 

With a Larjh orbital shuttle, comfort is paramount. On- 
board the Felpajh 10A, the bar is always open and the food 
is superb (just ask the droid brain that runs the food 
processor — it stores over 20,000 different recipes!). 

If hyperdrive transport is not immediately available, no 
problem — this model also comes with adequate cabin 
space for several guests as you await the arrival of your 
courier vessel. Finally, you can take that extended vacation 
you ve been needing without anyone knowing where you 
are or what you're up to. 

Craft: Larjh StarCorporation Felpajh 10A 
Type: Sublight passenger shuttle 


17 


J| ALL AMINIUM 


Scale: Starfighter 

Length: 31 meters 

Skill: Space transports: Felpajh 10A 
Crew: 1 

Passengers: 8 

Cargo Capacity: 5 metric tons 
Consumables: 10 days 

Cost: 225,000 (new), 100,000 (used) 
Maneuverability: 1D 

Space: 3 

Atmosphere: 260; 750 kmh 

Hull: 3D 

Shields: 1D 


i VEHICLE REMOTE ACTIVATION 
CONTROLLER 


Sometimes you just don't have time to go through nor- 
mal pre-flight operations. Save time and leave when you 
want (or need) to! 

Bespin Motors's DVI Activator is a hand-held remote 
activation controller which can be used to remotely start a 
given vehicle. The remote activator instructs the droid 
brain installed aboard the vehicle to begin normal ignition 
and pre-flight safety checks; by the time you arrive there, 
you're ready to go! 


Model: Bespin Motors Remote DVI Activator 

Type: Remote vehicle controller 

Cost: 500 (for speeders); 2,500 (for starfighter scale starships) 
Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Range is 2 kilometers. Pre-flight checks can take as 
little as 20 seconds (for some speeders) to well over five minutes 
(for some starships). The user must still pilot the vehicle manually. 


GAMEMASTER NOTE 


Anyone who has ever found themselves being 
chased by sore losers from a sabacc game will find 
this particular device an invaluable aid for a quick 
and easy getaway! 


Owners are encouraged to change the pre-in- 
stalled operating frequency once installation is 
completed. It adds a simple measure of security 
and helps prevent another person with a similar 
control device from activating your vehicle in the 
middle of the night without your permission! 


m CD-12A AUTOPILOT DROID BRAIN 


Far more sophisticated than the previous DVI activator, 
this unit is a favorite among smugglers and others who may 
need to make a quick getaway in one of their vehicles. The 
CD-12a autopilot droid brain can be added to vehicles, 
starfighters or freighters (of necessity, the starship brains 
are much more complicated and expensive). 

The unit comes in two pieces: the CD-12a droid brain and 
a wrist-mounted activator panel. The wrist activator has a 
range of 5 kilometers; when it is activated, the CD-12a droid 
brain is alerted. The brain then proceeds to take control of 
the vehicle it is mounted in, and uses the vehicle's sensors, 
guidance and drive systems to guide the vehicleto the wrist 
activator (which broadcasts a homing signal). It is rumored 
that some pilots have illegally modified their CD-12s to have 
combat skills. 


Type: Go Corp CD-12a Autopilot Droid Brain 

DEXTERITY 0D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

(Has one of the following:) Repulsorlift operation 4D, space trans- 
ports 4D, starfighter piloting 4D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 0D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Repulsorlift repair 2D 

Cost: 5,000 (repulsorlift), 10,000 (starfighter-scale vehicles) 
Availability: 4, R 

Game Notes: Wrist activator has a range of up to 5 kilometers. 
Design: Tom Neville (23rd place) 


il SYSTEM DIAGNOSTIC FILTER 


Ever wonder if your ship's computer is lying to you? 
Wouldn't you like to ask your sublight engine why it's 
operating at 37% and get a straight answer? 

As today's ship systems get smarter, they get more 
complicated and temperamental. What do you do when the 
old R2 unit is busy on another section of the ship and you 
want answers from you ship's computer system? 

GalStarTech's (GST's) system diagnostic filter (SDF) will 
cut to the chase when it comes to dealing with your starship's 
computers. By accessing the diagnostic programming of 


18 


Fantastic Technology 


GALLADINIUM BB 


ship equipment directly, the SDF presents the pertinent 
data quickly and concisely. This is an item no technician 
should be without. 

Thedevice appears to bealarge datapad with a separate 
droid brain processing unit. Two computer adaptors con- 
nect the processing unit and the ship's computers. The unit 
adds +1D+1 to computer programming/repair when used to 
diagnose shipboard computer problems or +2 to space 
transports repair rolls when dealing with system malfunc- 
tions that are not totally computer-related (hyperdrives, 
sublight drives, etc.). | 


If the roll is failed by more than 10, then the ship com- 
puter system being diagnosed has detected an intrusion 
into its programming. The system shuts down and must be 
completely re-booted by the pilot or technician (normally 
an Easy computer programming/repair task but the start-up 
takes at lease 15 minutes). 

Model: GST System Diagnostic Filter 

Type: Starship computer translator 

Skill: Computer programming/repair, space transports repair 
Cost: 3,500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Adds +1D+1 for computer programming/repair for ship 
board computer systems and «2 to space transports repair. 
Design: Dennis F. Belanger (11th place) 


Fantastic Technology 


19 


~ [| 6ALLADINIUM 


Droids have long been a familiar part of the techno- 


matter of minutes, while video, audio and vital statistic 
relays allowing remote diagnostics of patient symptoms 


logical workplace. Beyond their obvious utility in manu- 
facturing or engineering capacities, we at Galladinium 
have long held that a droid's place is in the home, the 
office, the starship ... 


and preparation for patient transportation with a minimum 
of delay. In crisis situations, an attendant droid's program- 


in short, everywhere ming allows it to act independently, performing diagnostic 


GAMEMASTER NOTE 


There is probably a t 
gamemasters and players to u 
prevalence and variety of mech 
Wars universe. Droids are, in ma 
ances of the Star Wars un 
els for the most specializ 

What follows are a nu 
units (some seemingly r 
logically fit into a univers 
mon and relatively i inexpe 


century). 
The droid prices listed here € 


widely available at reduced prices. - 


il ATTENDANT DROID 


“Dooba! Dooba! Look! Branli hurt her finger.” 

“And how did that happen my little one?” 

“She fell on the grav slide.” 

“All right let’s have a look see, shall we? Are you sure 
you re all right, my dear?" 

“Tm fine. I could see you watching me the whole time, but 
Branli can't see that far. Can you fix her finger for her?" 

"Already done, my love. See, she's all better." 


Professional medical attention, twenty-plus hours a day 
can now be yours with the MK 8001 attendant droid, the 
newest addition to AccuTronics's droid catalog. With an 
attendant droid on the premises there's never any question 
of your loved ones getting the proper attention and, should 
it be necessary, emergency medical care. Comlink links into 
planetary communication systems allow attendant droids 
to summon aid from nearby medical treatment centers in a 


20 


tasks and stabilizing a patient's condition before help ar- 
rives on the scene. All this and the ability to mend a 
plasticene doll's broken finger in the same package. 

Type: AccuTronics MK 8001 Attendent Droid 


3D, languages 3D+1 


le operation 2D+1, hover vehicle 
n 2D+2, sensors 2D 


arms, two legs) 
ry sensor recorders — Human range 


e MK 8001 is equipped with a medical refer- 


ing nearly 50,000 common illnesses and diseases. 


Search andretrieval sub-routines can access information to permit 


advanced first aid treatment of severe injury or illness in a crisis 
situation. 

Medical Support Link: Attendant droids can maintain direct commu- 
nication links with the nearest medical facility and are capable of 
two-way transmission of data using planetary communication grids. 
Move: 7 

Size: 1.6 meters tall 

Cost: 3,000 (new) 


m GUARDIAN DROID 


Revella stroked the drooping head and softly cooed to 
her faithful companion, "You're my best friend in the whole 
galaxy, Seti! You won't let those bad men get me, will you?" 

Seti lifted his head to let his sad eyes meet those of his 
mistress. A waggle of his long snout and a playful chuck 
under her chin was all the answer she needed. 

"Good boy, Seti. [knew you wouldn't let me down. Just let 
those bad ol’ Rebels try to harm me with you around ..." 

Revella put her arms around Seti's solar collector panels 
and hugged the droid for all she was worth. Seti's visual 


Illustrations by Christina Wald 


Fantastic Technology 


GAL I. ANMNILIM 


sensors glowed for a second as it scanned the horizon for any 
sign of the intruders it knew was out there somewhere ... 


— Scene from Revella’s Journey: A Story of a Girl and 
Her Droid, reprinted here with permission from Millennium 
Entertainments. 


Every child should have a companion: a faithful, devoted 
friend, someoneto share secrets with, and a guardian against 
strangers. When you're not there to care for them, let a CG 
guardian droid keep a mechanical eye on your loved ones. 
Absolute loyalty and programmed dependability insure that 
a guardian droid will protect its charge(s) from any unautho- 
rized personnel. 

Your offspring couldn't be in better paws. Give your child 
some fond memories, and you and yours some added peace 
of mind at the same time. 

Type: Cybot Galactica Guardian Droid 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 4D, brawling parry 2D+1, dodge 3D+2, melee combat 4D, 
melee parry 4D, running 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

Alien species 2D, intimidation 4D 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Communications 2D, sensors 4D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Search 3D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipped With: 

* Four legs 

e Hinged, grasping jaw with retractable blade incisors (STR+2 
damage) 

e Two visual and auditory sensor recorders — Human range 

* Retractable blaster (3D damage, ranges 0-3/10/20) 

Special Abilities: 

Loyalty Imprint: Absolute obedience to master and designated family 
members. Will react in potential threat situations to defend would- 
be attackers unless directly countermanded by designated family 
member. 

Move: 13 

Size: 1.5 meters tall 

Cost: 4,000 (new), 2,000 (used) 


FAITHFUL, DEPENDABLE, AND CHEAP... 


Guardian droids can serve in a wide variety of 
adventure settings. A droid can function as a perim- 
eter guard, patrolling a selected piece of turf around 
the clock. As family members targeted for a kidnap- 
ping attempt move away from their domestic setting, 


a guardian droid can accompany them. 

Should one of a family group need to work late at the 
office or laboratory, a guardian droid can be an unex- 
pected surprise to anyone attempting a break-in. With 
high-level search capability, a guardian droid can like- 
wise serve as a tracker should one or more family 
members go missing, A guardian droid is also capable of 
summoning assistance in a timely manner. 


m LITIGATION DROID 


Who wouldn't rather be out on the Alkenak fields getting 
in a few rounds rather than be stuck in a stuffy courtroom 
for days on end? Why depend on a fallible organic when you 
can have the perfect lawyer — one with a perfect memory? 


Fantastic Technology 


A litigation droid may be your best defense! 

Litigation droids are accepted as accredited members of 
the Imperial justice system. Droids cannot be “persuaded” 
to see things in a different perspective. Neither can they be 
required to give information against their client. 

Model: Caldrahlsen Mechanicals C4LR Litigation Droid 

Type: Legal representation droid 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Bureaucracy: Imperial administration 5D+2, bureaucracy: court- 
room procedures 5D+2, cultures 4D+1, intimidation 4D+2, law 
enforcement 6D, scholar: Imperial law 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 3D, persuasion 5D+1 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipped With: 

e Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) 

* Two visual and auditory sensor recorders — Human range 

* Holographic projector/recorder 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 

e AX-02 Verbobrain 

e Litigation module: Compilation of Imperial legal precedents and 
special case histories pertaining to a specific facet of Imperial law. 
Specializations can include: civil arrest and prosecution, commer- 
cial law, taxation law, military jurisprudence, etc. One base module 
is installed with each droid. Up to four additional modules can be 
installed at any one time. 

Special Abilities: 

Perfect Memory: Litigation droids keep a permanent record of all 
courtroom proceedings as well as data transcripts and holovisuals 
of materials entered into evidence in a court of law. It can replay 
courtroom conversations verbatim, as well as provide hardcopy of 
all relevant printed materials. 

Honesty: À litigation droid is prevented by its programming from 
lying, exaggerating or misrepresenting facts that might otherwise 
benefit its client/master. 

Move: 8 

Size: 1.6 meters tall 

Cost: 3,000 — 10,000 (varies dependent on specific programming 
requirements; up to 3 litigation expertise modules can be installed 
at 2,000 credits per module). 


m CYBOT GALACTICA 434-FPC PERSONAL 


CHEF DROID 

“For your dining pleasure this evening, gentlemen and 
ladies, | have produced a crisp caramaxoian salad with 
Dihneral herb-and-ale dressing. For the next course, a rack 
of toasted Febrinisand-prestors with a subtle gangini sauce. 
For your main course, you will have a selection of either 
Velossian caramachi shell-backs in white suvoli cream, or 
roasted Hillindor game fowl in brestel nuts with zinchari 
spice. For desert, [have arranged an assortment of Cavaellin 
spiced creams. I trust that will be acceptable." 

"Everything sounds fine, my dear fellow. Do commence." 

“As you Say, sir." 

"434-FPC is such a treasure. He's an absolute wizard in 
the kitchen. The best part of it is that he works for free. Just 
give him an occasional lubricant bath and he's happy!” 


Good food is one of the simple pleasures of life. Now, you 
can enjoy that pleasure every night in the comfort of your 
own home. Whether for that all-important dinner party or a 
quiet meal with someone special, the Cybot Galactica 434- 
FPC culinary droid is up to the task. 

In addition to a database with over 17,000 selected recipes 
from the far corners of the galaxy, this culinary servant can 
accompany you as a mobile food taste-tester, analyzer, shop- 
ping servant and, in a pinch, a host's helpful assistant. 


21 


ATTENDANT DROID 


PERSONAL CHEF DROID 


LITIGATION 
DROID 


GUARDIAN DROID 


22 Fantastic Technology 


GALLADINIUM B 


OKAY METALHEAD, START SPILLING 
YOUR SOLENOIDS! 


In the course of an adventure, characters can 
easily run afoul of any number of less-than-respect- 
able characters, especially powerful criminal fig- 
ures. Characters seeking to thwart a criminal's 
plan will need to locate sources of information and 
the best sources of information are those nearest 
the culprit. Don't overlook the presence of a litiga- 
tion droid: it will acquire a basic working knowl- 
edge of its owner's activities, if only to prepare a 
defense when its owner inevitably faces various 
charges. 

The droid may have a detailed memory of its 
owner's mansion and its floor-by-floor layout — 
"So, how many guards does your boss have up- 
stairs anyway?" The droid may know who its mas- 
ter is routinely dealing with in the local criminal 
underworld. 

While the droid's programming prevents it from 
implicating its master directly, that will not stop 
clever characters. The trick is to convince the 
droid that disclosing specific information is for the 
good of its owner. 


Type: Cybot Galactica 434-FPC Personal Chef Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Culinary arts 6D+2, cultures 3D, cultures: galactic cuisines 5D, 
cultures: food preparation 5D, home economics 4D-2, languages 
2D+1, value: foodstuffs 2D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipped With: 

e Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) 

e Two visual and auditory sensor recorders — Human range 

e Vocabulator speech/sound system 

e Various cooking attachments (replaceable; attach to left arm) 
* AA-] Verbobrain 

* TranLang | Communications module 

e Food Preparation Database 

e Food Sample Analyzer 

Move: 6 

Size: 1.4 meters tall 

Cost: 4,000 


ARE YOU SURE YOU QUESTIONED 
EVERY ‘BOT? 


A personal chef droid can be more than a mobile 
recipe book: it interacts with family members and 
friends on a routine basis. It overhears conversa- 


tions — sometimes ones others would not enjoy 
having repeated. In any investigation involving 
household members, investigation teams routinely 
question the domestic droids. Sometimes they can 
be a valuable source of information when you (or 
their owners) least expect it! 


Fantastic Technology 


m PERSONAL SECRETARY DROID 


Good help is hard to find; it’s even harder to program. 
The designers at Opti-Prime, however, accepted the chal- 
lenge. The result was the XA-540 personal secretary droid, 
a unit capable of handling all your administrative needs 
quietly, competently, and with unswerving loyalty. In the 
XA-540, today’s busy executive will find an efficient assis- 
tant, dutiful subordinate, and perfect business confidant, 
all rolled into one. The XA-540 can be assigned a wide 
variety of administrative tasks, ranging from correspon- 
dence and personal stock portfolio management to budget- 
ary analysis and supervised employee relations. It makes a 
good cup of chaffir, too. 

Type: Opti-Prime XA-540 Personal Secretary Droid 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Bureaucracy 4D, business 4D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 1D+2 

Bargain 2D+2 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Computer programming/repair 3D+2 

Equipped With: 

e Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) 

* Two visual and auditory sensor recorders — Human range 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 

e TranLang I Communications module 

e Business administration policies and procedures database 
Special Abilities: 

Loyalty Inhibitor: Hard-wired programming inhibits this unit from 
disclosing any information classified as "business-sensitive" to 
unauthorized personnel. Attempts to reprogram this automated 
function will result in circuitry overload and burnout. 

Move: 8 

Size: 1.6 meters tall 

Cost: 2,500 credits 


m V5-T TRANSPORT DROID 


Transport droids have been around for a long time, but 
they have become increasingly popular as the desire to cuts 
costs has encouraged harried starport staffs to use these 
droids to round out their labor pools. 

The V5-T transport droid is a standard fifth-degree unit, 
and is smart enough to follow basic commands. It can be 


23 


B^ l 5ALLANNIUM 


preprogammed with transport routes for faster cargo mov- 
ing, but it will take orders from just about anyone (it can be 
programmed to acknowledge only certain identification 
cards from starport employees). Advanced models can be 
equipped with a remote computer link, allowing them to 
access data about traffic conditions or have new orders 
delivered via com signals. 

Type: Veril Line Systems V5-T Transport Droid 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 4D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equippped With: 

e Retractable lifting arm (can lift up to 500 kilograms with a lifting 
skill of 4D) 

Move: 35 (tread version), 50 (repulsorlift version) 

Size: 2.2 meters tall 

Cost: 2,500 (tread version), 4,500 (repulsorlift) 

Game Notes: Carries up to two metric tons. 

Design: Adam Dickstein (20th place) 


m M4 MESSAGE DROID 


The M4 message droid is a sophisticated messaging unit 
with a high speed repulsorlift unit for rapid transit. The 
droid can carry datatapes and programs or it can holo- 
graphically record a message up to five minutes long. It is 
perfect for situations where open-air broadcasts might be 
intercepted. 

Type: Cybot Galactica M4 Message Droid 

DEXTERITY 1D 

Dodge 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equippped With: 

e Holographic projector/recorder 

e Repulsorlift drive unit with 4-meter flight ceiling 

e Body armor (+2D physical, +1D energy, military version only) 
e Internal sporting blaster (3D+1 stun damage, ranges: 0-5/10/20, 
military version only) 


Move: 30 

Size: 0.3 meters tall 

Cost: 2,000, 4,000 (military version) 
Design: Matthew Cunningham (21st place) 


m TUTOR DROID 


Quality education is a serious matter. Far too serious a 
matter to be left to any one individual. Those who care 
enough to provide their children with the best education 
look to Industrial Automation’s fine line of education and 
tutorial droids. For far less than what it would cost to hire 
a Human equivalent, Industrial Automation can provide 
your household with a qualified tutor droid versed in a 
variety of scholarly subjects, at whatever educational level 
is required. 

Type: Industrial Automation TTS-15 Education and Tutorial Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D+1, cultures 4D+1, economics 4D+2, languages 
4D+2, planetary systems 4D+1, scholar: applied educational theory 
5D+2, scholar: galactic history 4D, scholar: (various) 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Computer programming/repair 2D 

Equipped With: 

e Humanoid body (two arms, two legs) 

e Two visual and auditory sensor recorders — Human range 

* Vocabulator speech/sound system 

e ÀA-] Verbobrain 

e TranLang Il Communications module 

Special Abilities: 

Education Pack: Each droid comes pre-programmed with up to 
three specific areas of subject expertise to include: galactic history, 
material and theoretical sciences, languages, literature, multi-cul- 
tural literature, cultures, and mathematics. Specific programming 
selections and competence levels are selected prior to shipment. 
Move: 7 

Size: 1.5 meters tall 

Cost: 500 credit initial lease fee, 1,000 annual service contract fee, 
which includes routine inspection and program upgrades 


24 


Fantastic Technology 


M GALLADINIUM Bi 


aig LE-VO LAW ENFORCEMENT DROID 


The LE-VO law enforcement droid has been constructed 
by the technologically-oriented Rseikharhl species from 
the Rseik sector. Even though the LE-VO uses a blaster 
weapon, it hasn’t been responsible for any fatalities. The 
units have an exceptional service record, including remark- 
able stability (compared to other military droids). 

The Rseikharhls developed the droid as a deterrent to 
criminal activity. The stature of the LE-VO (at over two 
meters) scares many offenders. The droid is used for sup- 
port and perimeter patrol by police forces and private 
security firms around the galaxy. It will not fire on an 
opponent unless absolutely necessary, instead insisting on 
a peaceful surrender. Although a few perpetrators have 
been able to take advantage 
ofthedroid’s programming, # 
it has also prevented any |; 
wrongful deaths — a fair 
trade in the eyes of the 
Rseikharhls. 

Type: Rseikharhl LE-VO 
Law Enforcement Droid 


DEXTERITY 3D 
a NR-5 MAINTENANCE DROID Blaster 5D, dodge 3D+2 
A general maintenance and repair droid that can handle KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 
many starship repair tasks, the NR-5 is a competitor with Alien species 3D, bureau- 


cracy 3D, intimidation 4D, 
law enforcement 6D, 
streetwise 4D 


Industrial Automaton’s R2 Astromech. While it lacks the 
astrogation and piloting skills, itis also substantially cheaper, 


making it a good choice for budget conscious freighter MECHANICAL 2D 

captains. Repulsorlift operation 3D 

Type: Kalibac Industries NR-5 Maintenance Droid PERCEPTION 1D 

DEXTERITY 1D Con 2D+2, command 3D+2, investi- 
Dodge 1D+2 gation 4D+2, persuasion 2D, search 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 3D 

MECHANICAL 1D STRENGTH 3D 

PERCEPTION 1D TECHNICAL 1D 

STRENGTH 1D Equippped With: 

TECHNICAL 1D * Two auto-balance legs 
Computer programming/repair 4D, security 2D, space transports e Swivel torso 

repair 3D * Body armor: «2D physical and 
Equippped With: energy to all locations 

e Visual photorecptors (Human range, infrared, ultraviolet) Move: 8/12 

e Kalibac Mechro-l brain Size: 2.4 meters tall 

e Wide-band radio receptor Cost: 9,000 (new) 

e Retractable heavy grasper arm («1D to lifting) Availability: 2, R or F 

e Retractable fine manipulator arm Equipment: Blaster rifle (5D; 

e 2 treaded legs normally set on stun) 

Move: 3 Design: Mike Kogge (13th 

Size: 0.7 meters tall place) 

Cost: 2,200 (new) 

Design: Greg Dove (17th place) m DROID CUSTOMIZATION KIT 


For the “do-it-yourselfer” who just loves to tinker, Ulqib 
MacroTronics’s latest droid customization kit will provide 
hours of satisfied puttering, clanging, and occasional bang- 
ing in the backyard repair port. With a little bit of time and 
skill, you can now modify and enhance your mechanical 
servants to your own specifications at half the cost of 
having a professional do it for you. 

Everything you need to get started is included in this 
extensive collection of tools and accessories. Cut out the 
middleman and discover the joys of droid customization at 
the same time. 

Model: Ulqib MacroTronics Droid Customization Kit 

Type: Droid modification tool kit 

Skill: Droid programming, droid repair 

Kit Includes: 

e Droid datapad neural pathway linkage 

e Memory modulator (allows for skill and/or attachment software 


——— ——— A——— —— ——————Á——  ''————— ————————————————————Á————— v ——————iM———————————————————————————!—— 


Fantastic Technology 25 


EN Ẹ GALLADINIUM 


programming) 

e Memory wipe module (completely erases all non-hardwired 
memory and related skills) 

e Replacement actuators 

* Replacement micro-servos 

* Additional software node (boosts one specific skill +2D over the 
attribute ifthe droid's skill is less than 2D over the attribute; has no 
effect if the droid's skill is 2D or more over the attribute) 

* Broadband antenna receiver 

e Movement sensor (if the droid has less than 2D in search (over the 
Perception attribute), the search skill goes to «2D over Perception 
only when searching for moving objects within 100 meters of the 
droid) | 

* Repulsorlift motor (also requires repulsorlift repair skill to install; 
has a Move of 13 for droids under 100 kilograms). 

* [nternal computer interface socket 

e Two photoreceptors (moderately above Human range) 

e Two audio receptors (normal Human range) 

e Vocabulator panel 

* Database retrieval system (content files must be loaded after 
installation as per normal programming rules) 

* Remote programming receiver 

Cost: 400 (additional costs for specific attachments may also be 
incurred) | 

Game Notes: Most hardware additions also require successful 
installation of corresponding software programming to properly 
interface new equipment. Additional tools (e.g. electric arc welder) 
and other droid parts may be required for certain alterations. The 
gamemaster must determine specific difficulty levels and time 
taken. 


m MK-11 DROID DIAGNOSTIC 


Droids are so common that we tend to take them for 
granted. But what do you do when one of these mechanical 
marvels fails? Droid maintenance is easier than ever with 
the addition of this new droid systems analyzer. With this 
handy tool and 30 minutes of your time each month, your 
droid can be checked from top to bottom. 

The Mk-11 contains parameters for over 500 models. 
Simply punch in the type of droid you wish to scan and the 
specific system to review. Recommendations for general or 
specific maintenance are displayed in minutes. Now, you 
can personally see to it that your droid is in top mechanical 
condition. The savings in unnecessary repair bills will have 
the Mk-11 paying for itself in no time at all. 

Model: Interstellar Droid Monitoring, Inc. Mk-11 Droid Diagnostic 
Type: Droid diagnostic 

Skill: Droid programming, droid repair 

Cost: 200 

Game Notes: Very Easy droid programming roll required for stan- 
dard systems check and readout (takes 30 minutes). Diagnostic 
assisted repair procedures normally require an Easy droid repair 


26 


roll and the diagnostic's expertise adds +1D to the skill roll. This 
bonus is for maintenance only and does not apply to major repairs 
or modifications. 


an CL-3 DROID COMMAND LINK 


This unit allows the user to command a droid equipped 
with a response rig from a remote location. This link incor- 
porates all of the features normally found in a personal 
comlink, and adds a direct audio/video feed from the linked 
droid's sensors. Simple controls on the side of the device 
allow the wearer to switch between which of the droid's 
"visual" senses will be displayed on the eyepiece (normal 
Human range, infrared or ultraviolet if the droid's photore- 
ceptors can read data from these ranges). Another control 
allows the droid's communications to be displayed as text. 
The unit has a range of one kilometer. 

This option is quite popular when the command link is 
being used with Industrial Automaton's R2 series or other 
units which use high-density electronic languages. 


Fantastic Technology 


Although originally intended for use with droids operat- 
ing in hostile conditions, these units have seen occasional 
use in military operations when command teams have 
linked them to surveillance droids. 

Installation requires a Moderate droid repair roll, an Easy 
droid programming roll and two hours of work. 

Model: AccuTronics CL-3 Droid Command Link 
Type: Remote droid command link 

Cost: 850 

Design: Matthew Silvia (3rd) 


il ASTROMECH VOICE BOX 


This perhipheral, when attached to any of Industrial 
Automaton's R1 to R5 series droids. This peripheral, when 
attached to any of Industrial Automaton's R1 to R5 series 
droids reprograms the droid with the appropriate language 
(Basic, Bocce, Rodian, Wookie, etc.; langauge programs run 
from 25 to 100 credits). Attachments on the voice unit allow 
the user to vary the pitch, intonation and speech patterns 
to achieve almost any desired speaking voice, accent or 
effect. 

Installation requires a Moderate droid repair roll and 
takes 15 minutes. Removal of the unit requires an Easy droid 
repair roll and 15 minutes; failing the roll causes 3D stun 
damage to the droid and causes damage to its programming 
(one skill, selected at random, is eliminated). 


DAI. 


The voice box can cause operation problems for the R- 
series droid (on a mishap, the skill the droid is attempting 
to use fails or suffers a substantial penalty, such as -2D). A 
droid with a voice box can only be installed in specially 
refitted droid couplings aboard X-wing or Y-wing fighters or 
the owner must build a linked interface allowing the voice 
box to be mounted where it will not interfere with a stan- 
dard coupling (for example, by mounting the voice box on 
the head of the droid). Should the voice box be damaged or 
ripped off the droid, the droid suffers 3D stun damage. 
Model: Industrial Automaton R-Series Voice Box Adaptor 
Type: Astromech verbal attachment 
Cost: 250 
Design: Jason Davis (9th place) 


DOSS 


Fantastic Technology 


27 


Wherever a person spends their time should be a 
place of comfort and charm, of peace and productivity. 
The staff at Galladinium believes that good taste and 
elegance should never be sacrificed for mere conve- 
nience and utility. Whether it's the latest in computer 
science or the newest advances in holographics, 
Galladinium can pamper you with the finest conve- 
niences and the most comfortable furnishings. 


m AQUALISH BIO-LIGHT PANEL 


For the latest in bioluminescence, with a distinctively 
artistic appeal, consider the addition of an Aqualish bio- 
light panelto your favorite work environment. The Aqualish 
bio-light panel has a one-meter-tall by two-meter-long rect- 
angular tank with photo-chemical reactive plankton in a 
controlled liquid environment. When exposed to a variety 
of common gases, such as car- 
bon dioxide, nitrogen and hydro- 
gen,thesetiny creatures emit light 
in an ever-chang- 
ing array of fluid, 
picturesque pat- 
terns. 

Arecessed stud 
controls gas filters 
along the frame's 
outer edge. In this 
manner, the 
amount of light generated can be controlled. Both func- 
tional and decorative at the same time, this unique decora- 
tion is an eloquent statement of good taste. 

Model: Ferisoliq Imports, Ltd. ABP-980 
Type: Aqualish bio-light panel 

Cost: 250 

Availability: 2 


m BITH HIDING CUBE 


Have something of special value you'd like to show off 
only once in a while? With the intro- 
duction of the Bith hiding cube by 
Veretrex Securities, you can show off 
your favorite treasures when you like, do 
but hide these items in plain 
sight when the need arises. 

In essence a very ad- 
vanced prism, the Bith hid- 
ing cube appears to be a 
simple, transparisteel cube 
19 centimeters on a side. 


ppt 


LET ME KNOW IF THE LIGHTS GO 
OUT! 


Aqualish bio-light panels have an additional 
safety feature. The microscopic plants that gener- 
ate the light are susceptible to a variety of chemi- 


cals and gases. Should an Aqualish bio-light panel 
go dim for no apparent reason, this is a clear 
indication something is seriously wrong with the 
local air supply. In short, if the lights start to go out, 
reach for the emergency breather mask first and 
the emergency glow rod second! 


Each cube side has a series of specialized fiber optic relays 
which "carry" light from one edge of the cube's face to the 
other. When placed in a recess (such as in a wall, similar to 
how wall safes are often constructed), a viewer will not see 
the cube, but rather a continuous wall. The device does not 
work when out in the open since the light will create an 
unusual "fuzzy" effect which will actually draw attention. 
Model: Veretrex Securities Hiding Cube SCT-1000 

Type: Security container 

Cost: 3,000 

Availability: 4 

Game Notes: When activated and properly hidden, a viewer must 
make a Moderate Perception roll to notice "something" about the 
wall where the cube is. External magna-locks along the container 
surfacerequire a Very Difficult securitytotalto pick. The container's 
outer surface has a Strength of 4D to resist damage. 


m CFC-100 CORPORATE WATCHER COMPUTER 


It's difficult for even the most savvy of galactic business 
barons to keep tabs on important developments in the 
galaxy's corporate giants. With CoreDataFile's newest "cor- 
porate watcher" at your fin- 
gertips, you'll feel like you 
can do the impossible. 

CDF's corporate © 
watcher provides finan- 
cial tracking information 
on over 10,000 of the 
galaxy's most important 
business conglomerates, in- 
cluding the Galaxy 500, Surnack's 
Sentinel 100, and the Tradoc Core Index. 

The unit must wait for the datato arrive, whichis dependent 
upon the user’s proximity to actual trading sites — those 
with access to the HoloNet will always have an advantage 


Illustrations by Christina Wald 


28 


Fantastic Technology 


GAILADINIUM BB 


with continuous data updates. 

Review corporate management decisions, hirings and 
firings, certificate fluctuations and new trends. The secret is 
in the programming. CoreDataFile's CFC-100 combines so- 
phisticated artificial intelligence routines to find the gems 
of information hidden in the huge datastreams that pour 
over today's communications networks. 

The core package includes a service contract with Bank 
of the Core's (BoC's) Investment Division. BoC will provide 
weekly data updates to keep you up to date with the latest 
financial information. With the CFC-100 at your disposal, 
you'll know which “hot picks" to pursue long before the 
"experts" have selected them. The CFC-100: it's there for 
you — or your competition. You decide. 

Model: CoreDataFiles CFC-100 

Type: Corporate watcher computer 

Skill: Business 

Cost: 12,500, 10,000 credit annual service fee for weekly data 
upgrades 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Requires no specialized computer skills to install. 
However, an Easy business roll is required to retrieve information 
dealing with a given company's recent operations. Moderate or 
higher skill totals are required when attempting to model hypo- 
thetical “what-if” scenarios and analysis of long-term trends. 


WATCHING THE WATCHER 


What a person reads is a good indication of that 
individual's personal interests. So too are those 
things he or she uses a watcher computer to keep 
track of. 

Accessing the memory logs of this machine can 
reveal some interesting clues about its owner. For 
example, why might the user be tracking the rising 
cost of mineral extraction on a given planet's north- 
ern slope? Did he or she have a hand in formenting 
recent labor unrest simply to drive the price up? 
Why the sudden interest in corporations thought 
to be dummy fronts for criminal organizations? 
And why has the user been monitoring arms pro- 
duction in an out-of-the-way backwater section of 
space? 

Perhaps he or she is working out a pattern of 
distribution — the sort of information a pirate (or 
Rebel) would pay dearly to obtain. 


m POCKET SECRETARY 


This is a voice activated, hands-free datapad. The datapad 
has two pieces. The first is a standard datapad with an 
internal audio coding chip. The second is a comlink-sized 
device which can be hand-held or 
attached to a headset, necklace 
or similar device. 

To begin recording, the 
user simply speaks a prede- 
termined code-phrase (nor- 
mally “Begin recording” or 
“Make a note”). The sensor 
then begins relaying the 
spoken messages to the 
datapad, which translates the 
information into computer data. 


Fantastic Technology 


Computer data can be reviewed at a later date. If the 
datapad has any problems translating data, queries may be 
registered during the data dictation or later during a review 
session. Some people use these devices for covert record- 
ing of conversations. 

Model: MicroData Pocket Secretary 

Type: Audio activated datapad 

Cost: 150 

Availability: 1 

Design: Mike Zebrowski (honorable mention) 


m DCD-4800 CRYPTOGRAPHIC CODER 


He knew he had to be careful. One slip and the informa- 
tion could fall into the wrong hands. Defas looked nervously 
over his shoulder for the hundredth time while his fingers 
continued to fly over the keyboard. 

"Who's up there?" 

How did they find him so soon? No matter! Just keep 
working. 

"All right, whoever you are, come 
out of there!” 

Don't stop now, just alittle more 
to go. 

“This is your last chance. I 
want you out here, now!” 

Finished! And just in the 
nick of time, too. : 

“Pll be right out, Father. Si 
Just finishing up some 
school work.” 

Defas disconnected his computer 
interface from the cryptographer and 
surveyed the sheet coming out of the 
output slot. The information confirmed his hopes. 

That's one grade card they'll never see! 


Corporate espionage is on the rise. Your client's confi- 
dentiality requires an extra measure of security. What to 
do? Well, if data security is what you're after but you want 
to avoid spending a fortune, consider a hand-held crypto- 
graphic coder from Ealewon Electronics. 

With a cryptographic coder your files are protected from 
unauthorized access by the very latest encryption coding 
techniques. Mark individual files for access by password 
while maintaining generally “open” systems. Hide sensitive 
materials from view — even from sophisticated search 
operations. 

Model: Ealewon Electronics DCD-4800 Cryptographic Coder 
Type: Computer data encryptor 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 1,200 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Requires an Easy computer programming/repairroll to 
secure selected data files with selected option(s) in place. At- 
tempts to access encrypted files require a Difficult computer pro- 
gramming/repair roll if the user doesn't have the appropriate 
authorization. 


m DEFEL HEAT REDUCER 


This unusual device uses power plates containing cul- 
tures of native Defel micro-organisms that thrive on ultra- 
violet radiation. When exposed to ultraviolet radiation, 
these one-celled creatures absorb local heat sources, gen- 
erating electricity, which is stored in battery cells. This 
particular heat exchanger is ideal for use in desert climates 
or any environment rich in ultraviolet radiation. 

Model: Farendress Defel Exports HR-1200 
Type: Heat reducer/energy generator 


29 


Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: When operating in an environment with high levels 
ultraviolet radiation, the exchanger can produce enough energy to 
power several datapads or other small appliances. 


imm DISPERSAL CANISTER 


Valkrex has come up with a portable dispersal canister 
which is ideal for any number of situations. Whether at 
home, in a busy office or even in a cramped shipboard 
cubicle, you can now get rid of unwanted trash easily. 
Valkrex's dispersal canister works by disintegrating waste 
elements in a contained fusion reaction. The end result is 
harnessable electricity stored in rechargeable power packs 
which can be placed in datapads, comlinks, or any other 
energy-using appliance. 

Model: Valkrex Machinery Dispersal Canister 
Type: Personal waste disintegrator 

Cost: 400 

Availability: 2 


Game Notes: Canister is a round cylinder, 1 meter tall by 40 
centimeters in diameter. Each canister contains 6 removable and 
rechargeable power packs. 


A VERY USEFUL TOOL 


Forget about the trash! Secrets are dangerous. 
Anyone who has something to hide will want to 


have a quick and easy way of disposing of that 
“sensitive information” before it falls into the wrong 
hands. The dispersal canister is perfect for that 
situation. 


am FOOD MANAGER 


"What do you mean you've just invited your supervisor 
to dinner? I can't get ready for another party at such short 
notice ..." 


More than asimple food processing unit, the Synergentics 


food management system is a fully automated food prepa- 
ration system capable of replicating thousands of recipes 
from across the galaxy. A built-in ingredient equivalency 
module suggests alternate foodstuffs to approximate rare 
ingredients when preparing exotic dishes. An automated 
menu planner will advise you of specific quantities re- 
quired, whether you are feeding one person or a platoon of 
stormtroopers. Just add the ingredients and the system 
takes care of the rest. 

Model: Synergentics Rapid Recipe Food Management System 
Type: Automated food preparation unit 

Skill: Culinary arts (Knowledge skill) 

Cost: 250 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: A Very Easy culinary arts roll is required to locate a 
specific recipe from the unit’s database. A Moderate (or higher) roll 
is necessary to incorporate a new recipe from scratch. 


a REFRESHER BOOTH 


The refresher booth is a fully automated and self-con- 
tained ultrasonic shower system that invigorates while it 
cleans. By incorporating minute amounts of specially-for- 
mulated bacta, it promotes cellular repair and muscular - 
stimulation. Low-frequency heat induction coils provide a 
warm drying cycle that leaves the user refreshed. All it takes 
is 10 minutes! 

Model: zZip Product Concepts Ltd. Refresher Booth 
Type: Personal hygienic refreshment system 

Cost: 2,500 

Availability: 2 


l———————————————————— —'——nÜÀ—MnÁÀ—ÓIÁÀ— 5j 
30 


Fantastic Technology 


JUST WHAT THE MEDICAL DROID 
ORDERED ... 


Refresher booths are common at medical facili- 


ties, hotels, health clubs and even starport facili- 
ties. Refresher booths make a convenient hiding 
place in a pinch and an even more convenient drop 
point for smuggled goods. 


as REPULSOR LOUNGE FLOATER 

The boss rejected your schematics without even looking 
at them. Who does that predsill think heis 
anyway? Still, after five minutes in your 
new repulsor lounge floater, the world 
seems almost tolerable after all! 

The 432GLM is a perfect 
unit for relaxation after a 
tough day on the corporate | vd 
battlefield. With ad- ——— OU 
justable repulsor wu o ^ = 
fields from one to 
30 centimeters and | 
micro-inducers for 
arelaxing massage. 
Pamper yourself. 
You deserve it. 
Model: Gafladen Lounger 432GLM 
Type: Repulsor lounge floater 
Cost: 350 
Availability: 2 


i GRAV MILL 

Work off that excess stress. Give yourself a good work- 
out in the privacy of your own home with a Quarlitech 
gravity treadmill. Perhaps you need to acclimate yourself to 
working in higher (or lower) gravity environments. Now, 
nothing could be simpler with the grav mill from QAI. 
Model: Quarlitech Aergronics, Inc. GRGC-800 | 
Type: Grav treadmill incline | 
Cost: 700 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Dedicated training on the grav mill for an extended 
period of time (anywhere from a few days to weeks, depending 
upon the severity of gravity change) can help eliminate any penal- 
ties due to higher or lower gravity worlds. 


DAI. 


m MAGNA LOCK 


With the right tools and enough time, a dedicated thief 
can defeat the most sophisticated electronic lock systems. 
Locris magna-locks are designed to provide that extra bit of 
security. The magna-lock shapes micro magnetic fields to 
almost molecularly bond two items in place. Place them on 
your entrance panel and attach them to the adjoining wall. 
Once activated, the magna-lock will ensure that your door- 
way will remain closed until you remove the lock from the 
inside. Magna-locks can be similarly used to secure viewport 
windows, speeder accessports, and other points of en- 
trance. 

Model: Locris Syndicates MLC-50 

Type: Surface locking mechanism 

Skill: Security 

Cost: 150 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: A Very Easy security rollis required to activate the unit 
in place. The device adds +2D to an object's Strength to resist 


damage. 


im MONAFILAMENT SCREEN GUARDS 


When you'reserious about guarding your home or office, 
try a set of Novaplex security screen guards. Place one of 
these strips either above or below any possible intrusion 
point. Once activated, hundreds of needle-sharp 
monofilament fiber strands are extended vertically up to 2 
meters in length. Practically invisible, even with night- 
enhanced vision devices, these tiny "shredders" will help 
unauthorized personnel "get the point." Use of such protec- 
tive measures is illegal in many systems. 

Model: Novaplex Monofilament Screen Guards 
Type: Anti-intrusion device 

Cost: 450 (1 pair 80 centimeter long strips) 
Availability: 4, F, R or X 


Fantastic Technology 


31 


- [| GALL ANNIUM 


Game Notes: An intruder must make a Very Difficult search roll to 
detect strips in place. Contact with the strips causes 6D damage (if 
the subject is moving rapidly when contact is made, increase the 
damage to 9D). 


imm PX-7 HEAT SENSOR 


This small hand-held device can scan for heat sources 
within a 100-meter radius. The scanner’s visual display 
notes relative intensity for heat sources and distance. 
Model: ChandrilTech PX-7 Heat Sensor 
Type: Hand-held heat sensor 
Skill: Sensors 
Cost: 250 
Availability: 4 
Game Notes: Detects heat sources in a 100-meter radius. Heat 
intensity is indicated by brightness of image on readout screen. 
Design: Dale Jackson (19th place) 


m SUN ROOM 


Feeling a little depressed lately? Tired of weeks of deep- 
space travel under artificial light sources? Do you long for 
a little "natural" light? Well, we may not be able to provide 
a sandy beach, but we can give you a sun room, which 
closely approximates natural lighting conditions on any 
number of worlds. Each unit (an immense 20 square meters 


32 


and three meters tall) is custom configured to suit specific 
radiation, light and temperature levels as specified by the 
owner, allowing the owner to receive any needed or desired 
lighting condition. 

Model: zZip Product Concepts Limited, Deluxe Sun Room 

Type: Artificial environment booth 

Cost: 22,500 

Availability: 3 


LOOK FOR THE LARGE AQUALISH 
WITH THE RED TUNIC ... 


While sun rooms are popular toys of the rich 
(status symbols, as it were), larger sun rooms are 
to be found in large spaceports or luxurious hotel 
suites. They serve as convenient meeting places 
for passing contraband, courier document ex- 
changes, informal business meetings, or even simple 
social outings ... 


m UNIVERSAL COMPUTER INTERFACE 


The release of MerenData's universal computer inter- 
face (UCI) takes the stress and strain out of working with 
unfamiliar computer systems. Simply access this interface 
card as you would any other data chip and the UCI examines 
the computer system to determine its operating proce- 
dures. As you enter commands, the UCI will interpret those 
commands and provide assistance to help you navigate the 
foreign computer system. Now you can spend your valuable 
type focusing on the job that needs be done instead of 
hunting down a computer you can talk to. 


Model: MerenData Universal Computer Interface 

Type: Computer access translator 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 2,500, 100 (annual software upgrades) 

Availability: | 

Game Notes: A computer programming/repair roll is required for 
successful operation (difficulty varies based on how much the 
unknown computer system varies from standardized systems). A 
successful roll allows the user to add a +1D bonus to any subse- 
quent computer programming/repair rolls using this system. This 
device will not override security programming in place nor will it 
permit otherwise unauthorized access to host systems. This unit 
does, however, provide for easy data transference between what 
might otherwise be incompatible system architectures. 


Fantastic Technology 


i UNIVERSAL POWER ADAPTOR 


Whether it's intersystem business travel or personal 
relocation half-way across the galaxy, few things are more 
frustrating than arriving at a new destination only to find 
that the power access interfaces do not match the power 
couplings or ratings of your appliances. The Udrane Elec- 
tronics power adaptor modulates the incoming current to 
match the needs of any device with a number of variable 
input adaptors. 

Model: Udrane Galactic Electronics Universal Power Adaptor 
Type: Universal power adaptpor 

Cost: 100 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: The term "universal" is not 100 percent correct: the 
user is required to make a Very Easy Technical roll to make the 
proper adiustments for the adaptor. 

Design: Elizabeth Stuart 


m HOLO COMMUNICATOR 


More than just a simply two-way message transmitter 
and receiver, the Tramora VDV-100 offers specialized com- 
munications options, including holographic relays (pro- 
vided the local communications network is suitably 
equipped). Special security features allow blockage of spe- 


Fantastic Technology 


cific holo signals or identification of an incoming signal's 
source. À standard interphase module also allows for the 
down-loading and visual recording of any incoming mes- 
sage to dozens of compatible host computer systems. And 
for those who do not always look their best first thing in the 
morning, a default image processor built into the unit can 
create a virtual image to replace the owner's actual fea- 
tures. 

Model: Tramora Interstellar Communications VDV-100 

Type: Holo communications display 

Cost: 800 

Availability: 2 


m INSTAMIST GENERATOR 


The InstaMist Generator is a simple device which expels 
the contents of a high-pressure cartridge. The most com- 
mon use is to generate a fire extinguishing mist which turns 
into a smothering foam. Water mist cartridges have also 
found useon desert worlds, where moisture farmers usethe 
mists to stimulate necessary reactions to extract water 
from rock veins. Yet others have used the misty fog as a 
means of cover for escape (acts as thick smoke; see page 63 
of Star Wars, Second Edition for more information). 


Model: Agrierd Intergalactics InstaMist Generator 
Type: Mist generator 

Cost: 15 (dispenser), 10 (mist cartridge) 
Availability: 2 

Design: Mike Kogge (honorable mention) 


33 


J GALLADINIUM GALL. 


JEWELRY 


It could beasummit at the governor’s palace. Perhaps 
thenew ambassador is hosting areception. Maybe you'd 
just like to celebrate your latest promotion. Whatever 
the occasion, you'll look positively radiant with your 
choice of custom crafted jewelry from Galladinium. 

As you might suspect, the following articles are not 
mere costume pieces. Each has been carefully selected 
to combine style with functionality. Examine the en- 
closed illustrations. and imagine how you'd look wear- 
ing a piece of Galladinium’s finest the next time you need 
to make that very special impression. 


E CORUSCANT CASCADER 


The throng outside the Imperial Cavalcade of Stars last 
night waited nearly six hours in near-freezing rain to get a 
glimpse of holo-vid siren Quintana Trill. It was well known 
that Lady Trill never missed an opening night screening of 
her new holofilms. Similarly, few doubted that when she 
finally did appear, "Quinta" (as she is known to her fans) 
would make a spectacular entrance. 

Quinta's fans were not disappointed. À bare three min- 
utes before the holo's opening sequence, with an eight-man 
escort, Quinta Trill’s speeder settled down outside the 
Cavalcade and the actress emerged to a thunderous round 
of applause. The hearty ovations were cut short, however, 
by the unexpected display that greeted the crowd. 

Quinta emerged from her speeder covered in liquid fire. 
Rivulets of blue, red, and amber flame seemed to dance 
about her person while a halo of yellow moonbeams flowed 
down her shoulder-length black hair. As she moved toward 
the theater's entranceway, with every fluid motion the 
sparkle of a hundred miniature novas rippled around her. 
When she waved to her astonished admirers, flame danced 
from her fingertips and the trail of her gown reflected a soft 
ashen glow that gave the illusion of Quinta gliding along the 
path like some mythological heroine of old. The net result 
wasaspectacular entrancefew will ever forget. Regrettably, 
Quinta's latest holo-vid, Denizens of Dakaret IX, has met 
with less than spectacular reviews. 


— From “Your Stars And Mine,” Morgraine 
Delefrenquin, Society News Editor, Chandrilan Daily 
Messenger. 


Developed by Farbreini MicroElectronics Limited, 
Coruscant, the Coruscant Cascader can be incorporated 
into any piece of clothing. When activated, it produces a 
dazzling matrix of custom-designed light shapes that high- 
light the figure and accentuate the positive! Essentially a 
controlled, low-power "static lightning” show of ever-chang- 


ing hues, the Cascader responds to the slightest movement, 
with spectaular light sequences flowing off and around the 
user. The Cascader is perfectly safe; those touching it 
receive only a slight charge that’s barely a tingle! 

Model: Farbreini MicroElectronics Limited Coruscant Crusader 
BPEA-1A 

Type: Electronic molecular excitation net 

Cost: 5,000 

Availability: 4 


m CYBERNETIC NEXUS RING 


For those cyborgs among our valued customers, may we 
suggest a Bith cybernetic nexus ring. This expertly crafted 
design appears at first glance to be an ordinary signet ring. 
When the top is swung back, however, a special chemically- 
coated monofilament fiber extends outward from this im- 
plant, expanding to a full meter in length. This fiber has a 
standard energy jack connector at the end, allowing the 
wearer to interface with many local power sources. The ring 
also has an extended power cord which can interface di- 
rectly with cybernetic attachments, such as prosthetic 
arms and legs. Once so connected, the nexus fiber core 
conducts a regulated flow of electrical current to a storage 
battery in the ring, or if the user selects, the energy can be 
fed directly into the prosthetic. The ring contains an energy 
converter which adjusts the energy flow to temporarily 
boost prosthetic performance. 

Model: Menendahl Cybertronics Cybernetic Nexus Ring 
Type: Cyborg power interface 
Cost: 5,000 


Illustrations by Christina Wald 


34 


Fantastic Technology 


GALLADINIUM ff 


Availability: 4, R 
Game Notes: If the user stores one hour’s worth of energy, the DIPLOMACY BY OTHER MEANS 


prosthetic in question gets a +1D Strength or Dexterity bonus for 10 ; 2 : ; ; 
minutes. No more than 15 minutes' worth of energy (use time; 1 1/ A dissuasion field is the ideal accessory when 


2 hour charge time) can be stored by the ring. However, if a personal firearms are not acceptable. In addition to 
complication is rolled while the *charged" prosthetic is in use, the deterring potential assailants, the dissuader po- 
cyborg suffers 4D stun damage due to MO energy Men litely but firmly gets across the message that you 
If the user employs the nexus ring more than once per week, have 
the user make a Moderate willpower roll for each additional use. If want your personal Spese: 
theroll fails, the cyborg has developed a psychological need for the 
boosted energy — if the user doesn't boost at least once a day, the m GORONDIN HOLO CHRONOMETER 
character's Strength is considered to be reduced by -1D. While ia ; 
boosted, however, the character uses their full Strength and gets No matter how har d he tried, Jondris just couldn t sleep. 
the «1D bonus for using the ring. How he missed Madillis when she was gallivanting halfway 
across the galaxy on business trips. 

Jondris remembered he was still wearing his chronom- 
eter. With a flick of the wrist, a miniature holo of Madillis 
appeared before his weary eyes. 

“The time is 3:12 in the morning, darling. I think you 
should try and rest. You probably have a busy day ahead of 
you...” 


im DISSUASION FIELD BELT 


Don't sacrifice your security in a crowd. With the Palla- 
dia Electronics DFB-200, you can be sure that "No" means 
“NO!” 

Designed as a stylish accessory, this technological mar- 
vel generates a low-energy, 360-degree force field radiating 
out to 3 centimeters from the wearer’s body. The unit’s 
power pack offers three hours of continuous operation (at 
the lowest setting of 1; the highest setting of 4 offers only 45 
minutes of use) and is rechargeable with many standard 
power systems. 

Model: Palladia Electronics DFB-200 

Type: Proximity defense field generator 

Cost: 700 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Any significant kinetic energy pressure automatically 
triggers energy release equivalent to 1D-4D stun damage (damage 
set by wearer; net effect varies from a mild electrical shock to a 
damaging, but non-lethal, blast). 


With a Gorondin holographic chronometer you'll never 
think of time quite the same way again. Accurate to within 
one second per standard year, the Gorondin chronometer 
is much more than a simple time-piece. The wearer can 
choose from over a dozen built-in holographic displays to 
relay time (standard or programmable for 30 local time- 
keeping standards), temperature, or other vital informa- 
tion. Deluxe models also allow for holographic personalized 
messages up to 15 centimeters in height. Recordings may be 
made on standard holographic recorders, run through the 
accompanying chronometer standardization software, and 
downloaded via a traditional computer cable. 

Model: Gorondin Chronometrics Time Piece Model 7643 

Type: Personal holographic chronometer 

Cost: 300 (standard model), 50 (chips with additional imagery), 
500+ for deluxe models (depending upon features) 

Availability: 2 


Fantastic Technology 35 


ANY LAST WORDS? 


Maybe so! Adventurers should be advised that 
in a pinch the holo chronometer could be used to 
record a brief message. Such a message need not 
be audible. Under normal circumstances only the 
wearer would be able to view the message and only 
then if one happened to check for the time of day. 
This device could come in handy should charac- 
ters need to smuggle verbal or visual data through 
a checkpoint where all voice and data recorders 
are being confiscated. 


m PERSONAL TRANSPONDER 


Having trouble keeping track of the kitlings as they 
scamper around the house? Ever forget to tell someone 
where you planned to wait for them after work? Do you often 
forget where your associate parked the speeder after drop- 
ping you off? Solve those problems with a personal tran- 
sponder ring. 

Functional as well as decorative, each zZip personal 
transponder comes equipped with a miniature signal tracker 
allowing the giver to find the receiver anywhere, any time. 
Each combination is specially coded to its own unique 
frequency so there is never any chance of your finding the 
wrong person at the wrong time. Available in a variety of 
attractive ring settings with precious and semi-precious 
stone adornments. 


LOC: 20M | 


Model: zZip Product Concepts Limited Transponder Ring 

Type: Personal location detector 

Cost: 100-500 (depending on setting design selected) 
Availability: 2 

Game Notes: A Very Easy sensorsrollis requiredto locate transpon- 
der signal within a 200 meter radius. 


36 


OH, YOU SHOULDNT HAVE ... NO, 
YOU REALLY SHOULDN' T HAVE! 


The giving of a transponder ring or similar de- 
vice in some alien cultures is seen as a special 


token of personal affection. Care should be taken to 
learn local cultural norms before making an off- 
hand purchase that could have important social 
implications. 


m RADIATION DEFLECTION PIN 


Are you particularly sensitive to the effects of harmful 
radiation? Are there potentially dangerous radiation levels 
at your next port of call? If so, then avoid unnecessary 
distress with Raflkind's latest personal radiation deflector. 

Not just a simple radiation detector, the entire line of 
stylish Raflkind rings, broaches and scarabs are designed to 
generate a particle field that effectively screens out low- 
level radiation. 

Model: Raflkind Industrials Radiation Screener 

Type: Personal ornamentation energy deflectors (various styles) 
Cost: 250-500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Miniature power cell must be replaced after 50 hours 
of continuous use. This item adds «1D to any survival rolls concern- 
ing low-level radiation. Bonus does not apply to high-energy radia- 
tion situations, but a warning alarm will sound if radiation levels 
exceed specified amounts. 


a EMOTION SUPPRESSANT 


In some situations, the outward display of emotion is not 
only considered socially unacceptable, but may be offen- 
sive! When confronted with these situations, turn to the 
emotion suppressant. Disguised as a pair of lapel ornamen- 
tations, the emotion suppressant generates a continuous 
stream of variable frequency waves which are soothing to 
the individual (the exact wave frequency varies by species). 

In circumstances where a sudden emotional reaction 
ensues, the emotion suppressant detects the signs of anxi- 
ety and increases the intensity of the waves to insure 
continued calm. The result grants the wearer the ability to 
maintain control rather than having to contend with the 
desire to throttle the cause of said anxiety. 

Some use the emotion suppressant for personal relax- 
ation. Others find it the only way to make it through the day 
without telling the boss what they really think of him, her or 
it eee 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI. 


Model: Consolidated Learning Systems Model ES23 

Type: Emotion suppression system 

Cost: 750 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Device uses micro-power cells. Each pair must be 
worn a minimum of 24-30 hours to allow for proper calibration to 
the wearer's life function rhythms. Device adds +2D bonus to any 
willpower rolls to resist emotional-impulses. Note that this device 
could conceivably be used to help resist torture (although it has no 
effect on resisting Force abilities). 


m ULTRASOUND SIGHT ENHANCER 


The visually impaired can now experience a kind of sight 
thanks to the latest advance in implant technology from 
Traxes BioElectronics. Traxes's newest invention looks like 
an ordinary metallic headband. 

In reality it is asophisticated sensory motion system that 
feeds imput directly into the user's brain. When worn, the 
device "paints" a three-dimensional sonic graph of the 
user's surroundings. The result is a crystal clear (if black 
and white) image of the recipient's environment. 

Model: Traxes BioElectronics Ultrawave Sight Enhancer 
Type: Ultrasonic wave motion sensory system 

Cost: 12,500; does not include cost of implantation surgery 
Availability: 4 


Fantastic Technology 


Game Notes: An Easy sensors total is required to properly calibrate 
wave receptors once implantation nodes are in place. Otherwise, a 
Very Easy Perception rollis required periodically (varies according 
to species) for normal use. Normal operating range is 50 meters and 
function is equally good in all environmental conditions excepting 
thoe involving severe electrical disturbances. 


m VERIDICATOR 


At first glance, the veridicator appears to be nothing 
more than a simple arm band with a multi-hued Falasian 
liquid crystal inset. Look inside, however, and you'll dis- 
cover the intricate sensory package that permits this device 
to distinguish minute changes in a being's physiology due to 
stress: in short, the veridicator is a subtle and stylish lie 
detector! 

Simply nonchalantly point the receptor band in the 
subject’s direction and fire away! Changes in the subject’s 
biorhythmic patterns are signalled by a series of pulsating 
pressure nodes on the veridicator’s underside. With one of 
these tastefully designed “costume pieces” you'll never 
have to wonder again whether your subordinate’s speeder 
really threw that repulsor-coil en route to work. Now you'll 
know. 


Disclaimer: Be advised that in some systems it is illegal 
to question a being under a verification scan without con- 
sent. Statements detected as being either true or false under 
veridicator scan are not recognized as admissible evidence 
in Imperial judicial proceedings. 

Model: Saldalith Manufacturing Veridicator 200 

Type: Response analysis device 

Skill: Sensors: personal sensors 

Cost: 4,000 

Availability: 4, R 

Game Notes: An Easy sensors roll is required for normal use. 
Detection range is 5 meters within a 60-degree scanning arc. Device 
acts as a Perception check (4D+2) when rolled to detect possible 
falsehoods. If target is aware of possible scans, the target can make 
a willpower roll to control natural biorhythms and disguise a lie. 


37 


MEDICINE 


It can be a dangerous galaxy out there! Accidents can 
happen when you least expect it and improbable mis- 
haps often have a way of becoming highly probable at 
the most inconvenient of times. Galladinium Galactic 
Exports appreciates the patronage of each and every 
one of its loyal customers and we want all of you to be 
around for our 60th anniversary edition, too! 


m ANTI-SHOCK BLANKET 


Preventing shock is a major consideration as part of any 
emergency medical treatment. Standard medpatches dis- 
pense antibiotics and coagulants to selected surface areas. 
This item fully protects an individual while administering 
fast-acting medicines to any portion of a patient’s body. 
Medicine dispersal is controlled by a medical computer or 
datapad linked to the blanket’s computer relay. 

Model: Fabreth Medical Biochemicals Shock Cloth 
Type: Emergency blanket 

Skill: First aid 

Cost: 250 

Availability: 2 


Game Notes: A first aid roll is required for normal application (use 
medpac rules on page 67 of Star Wars, Second Edition, but reduce 
difficulties by one level). The blanket's medicines must be replen- 
ished after one use (normally this costs about 20-40 credits). 


im NILAR FIELD CAUTERIZER 


The nilar field cauterizer is a pen-like device about 16 
centimeters long. It has an activation/deactivation switch 
near the top of the device. When activated, the cauterizer 
emits a small, low-frequency laser that cauterizes and disin- 
fects bleeding wounds. 


The nilar field cauterizer is made and distributed by the 
Nilar Med/Tech Corporation (secretly it sells many 
cauterizers to the Rebel Alliance at a substantially reduced 
price). It has saved the lives of thousands of Rebels injured 
in combat. It is most effective against small wounds, such as 
cuts, scrapes, abrasions, minor lacerations and even minor 
slug-thrower wounds (naturally, it is ineffective in treating 
internal injuries). 

Model: Nilar Med/Tech Corporation Field Cauterizer 

Type: Field cauterizer 

Cost: 200 (50 when sold to the Rebel Alliance) 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Heals minor wounds, removing stun damage due to 
bleeding only (gamemaster's discretion) 

Design: Mark McElroy (12th place) 


m CUSTOMIZED MEDICAL BACKPACK 


[f afamily member or friend wereto beinjured, could you 
save their life? With a customized medical emergency kit 
from Chiewab, you and your guest have a fighting chance 
until professional medical help arrives. All recommended 
procedures are explained in easy to understand, easy to 
follow, step-by-step instructions. Computer-assisted diag- 
nostic and treatment aids are also available. 

Model: Chiewab Amalgamated Pharmaceuticals Company ECM- 
598 

Type: Advanced medical kit 

Skill: First aid 

Cost: 600 


Illustrations by Christina Wald 


38 


Fantastic Technology 


GALI. ANINILIM 


Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Treat all components as requiring an Easy first aid roll 
unless otherwise noted. Each kit contains the following items: 

* Hand-Held Diagnostic Scanner: Easy first aid or Moderate sensors 
roll. Provides readout of patient's vital signs, specifics on injury 
and recommended procedures. 

e Medicines: Anesthetics, blood pressure, respiration and pulse 
regulation compounds, as well as other essential medicines (for a 
number of common species). 

e Emergency Procedures Database: Easy computer programming/ 
repair roll. Based on initial scanner findings, this emergency data- 
base provides the user with a quick reference collection of treat- 
ment procedures. 

e Filtration Mask: Supplies sufficient oxygen flow; may also be 
connected to one of several other atmospheric compound bottles 
for non-oxygen breathers. 

* Heat Closure Packs: Pressurized sealant bandages with medicines 
which, when exposed to air, cauterize and sterilize a wound up to 
10 centimeters in diameter. 

e Laser Scalpel: Difficult first aid roll. Precision cutting tool. 
eMedicine Dispenser: Moderate first aid roll. Can be loaded with a 
variety of medicines. 

* Portable Repulsor-Stretcher: Collapsible one-person operation 
anti-grav stretcher capable of supporting up to 150 kilograms. 

e Pressure Cuffs: Circular metal sleeves of varying diameters (5-30 
centimeters) which inflate pressurized chambers around wound 
area. 

e Sterile Heating Cloth: Covers an area up to 1.6 meters x 0.75 meters 
with a sterilized, heat-insulated covering. 

e 2 Universal Plasma Fluid Sacks: Requires Moderate first aid roll. 
Intravenous feed provides universal plasma stabilization serums. 


gm MED DIAGNOSTIC SCANNER 


Feeling a little out of sorts lately? Sure, maybe it's just 
stress ... but then again, it might be something more seri- 
ous. Check yourself out in the comfort of your home with 
Synthtech's personal medical diagnostic scanner. 

This hand-held scanner can be set to operate over a wide 
range of species norms. Select a diagnostic mode or punch 
in a specific set of parameters to look for. Simply run the 
scanner across your body a couple of times and see the 
results immediately. Any irregularities from previous estab- 
lished norms will be identified and cause percentage prob- 
ability is given. 

Model: Synthtech Medtech Corporation MDS-50 
Type: Personal medical scanner 
Skill: First aid 


Fantastic Technology 


Cost: 75 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: Àn Easy first aid roll will provide basic readouts 
relating to the patient's overall physical condition. Moderate first 
aid roll required to scan for specific ailments. Device will not make 
recommendations for treatment, but will identify current physical 
abnormalities and suggest probable causes. Difficulties should be 
adjusted for unusual or hard to detect conditions. 


ii PLASMA PROTEIN REPLICATOR 


This device uses proteins derived from local organic 
materials to synthesize stabilizing plasma serums in an 
emergency situation. While not intended as a long-term 
substitute for a particular blood type, it nevertheless can 
supply vital blood requirements for a short term crisis. Use 
ofthis device requires a genetic sample (skin, hair or blood) 
from the patient. 

Model: Hadrassi Emergency Medicals Systems Technologies PFG- 
700 

Type: Emergency blood synthesizer 

Skill: First aid 

Cost: 5,500 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: A Difficult first aid roll is required to properly prepare 
tissue and blood sample and match it up with local organic samples 
for synthesis. A successful operation can replicate up to 2 liters of 
blood substitute in one hour. 


39 


- J| BALL ANINIUM 


m PORTABLE SURVIVAL POD 


Sometimes a person's injuries are just too extensive to 
risktreatment onthe spot. In such cases, a portable survival 
pod can be used to keep the individual stable until he or she 
can be transported to a proper medical facility. Among 
those currently available, the Praxen 278 offers the best 
combination of field integrity and portability. A computer- 
guided assistance program built into the 278 will guide the 
novice user through step-by-step activation instructions. 
The Praxen 278 appears as a two-meter long cylinder. The 
central tube area swings aside to admit the patient. Com- 
puter assistance is accessed via a control module at the 
base of the pod. 

Model: Praxen Emergency Medical Supplies, Limited PSP-278 
Type: Emergency survival pod 

Skill: First aid; computer programming/repair 

Cost: 13,500 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Easy computer programming/repair and Moderate 
first aid roll to activate for an Incapacitated or Wounded patient. 
Moderate computer programming/repair and Difficult first aid roll to 
activate for a Mortally Wounded patient. Successful activation 
means that the patient will remain in current physical condition 
(will not worsen) as long as power is supplied from a power 
generator to the pod. 


E MED UNIT 


This is a computerized medical cot and first aid unit. It is 
2.5 meters long, one meter wide and one meter high. Several 
articulated limbs are attached along the edge of the cot. À 
small display and input panel is at the head of the unit. 

This self-contained device provides medical care when a 
medpac is insufficient and a medical droid or surgeon is 
unavailable. It can diagnose and treat common diseases and 
poisons, in addition to stabalizing a seriously injured pa- 
tient. 

Themed unit (the slang term is “medbed”) has first aid 5D 
and medicine 1D. It may attempt to make a diagnosis of the 
patient’s condition (this takes one minute and uses either 
skill). If the diagnosis is successful, the med unit will admin- 
ister appropriate treatments (medicines, anti-biotics, anti- 
viral or anti-toxin treatments). If the unit is not sure of the 
cause of the problem, the unit will register a “Diagnosis 
Indeterminable” message, followed by a listing of likely 
problems with their statistical probability. 

A 2-1B or other medical droid may interface with the med 
unit, and when doing so the droid receives a bonus of +2D 
to first aid and +1D to medicine. 

Model: Athakam II Med Unit 
Type: Portable medical unit 


40 


Cost: 3,000 
Availability: 2 
Design: Spencer E. Hart (10th place) 


m REPLAR SPLINT 


A replar splint creates a miniature suspension field to 
immobilize and relieve «pressure on any damaged bone. 
Once activated, limited movement is possible. 

Model: Xarnin Medical Technologies GRS-600 

Type: Field splint 

Skill: First aid 

Cost: 200 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: An Easy first aid roll is required for normal placement. 
This is increased to Moderate level for multiple or compound 
fractures. 


m SLUISSI GRAVITIC PRESSURE BANDAGE 


Anyone can apply a medpatch to stop blood loss and 
stabilize a patient. Little has been said, however, about the 
greater risk of internal bleeding. The Sluissi gravitic pres- 
sure bandage (SGB) helps prevent complications due to 
this type of injury. A SGB looks much like a hollow, metal 
cylinder with an inflatable cloth lining. When applied and 
connected to a medical datapad, micro-repulsor fields of 
differing strengths and sensitivities are applied from differ- 
ent directions, surrounding the damaged arteries and com- 


Fantastic Technology 


pressing selected cell walls without affecting surrounding 
tissues. Once in place, the patient can be moved carefully. 
Model: Slusani Interstellar PhamacologiesSGB-543 

Type: Micro-gravity pressure patch 

Skill: First aid 

Cost: 750 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Àn Easy first aid rollis required for proper placement 
and will allow Wounded patients to act as if unwounded or 
Incapactitated patients to act as Wounded (the injury is still there, 
but the patient will be able to move and so forth). It is up to the 
gamemaster to require players to properly roleplay the effects of 
this device. 


a SPRAY PLASTO-CAST 


Medical emergencies are never easy to deal with. In the 
event of debilitating injury or wound, this pistol-spray can 
be operated with one hand to apply emergency first aid. 

Simply remove the device's protective sterilization cap, 
point, and spray. The plasto-cast uses a chemical spray 
which is applied as a fine mist; it instantly solidifies over the 
target area. After coating the skin surface, additional appli- 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI. 


cations can be used to increase pressure, effectively creat- 
ing a chemical pressure bandage or even a life-saving tour- 
niquet. Safe and non-toxic, this plasti-coating can be re- 
moved with proper reactant chemical washes (included 
with unit or available at most medical centers). 

Model: SyntheCure Plasto-Cast 

Type: Spray immobilizing cast 

Skill: First aid 

Cost: 35 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: An Easy first aid roll is required for proper application; 
each pistol has one application and cannot be refilled. Effect is to 
add +2 tothe character’s next healing roll. Adjustments to emission 
tip controls width of spray. 

One plasto-cast contains sufficient chemical adherent to cover a 
surface area approximately 50 centimeters by 20 centimeters. In 
emergency situations, a Moderate survival roll may be substituted 
for the first aid roll. 


41 


EM BE 


PERSUNAL GIFT IDEAS 


From the beginning, Galladinium has been famous for 
its selection of personal gifts for discriminating buyers. 
Refined and artistic wares representative of the most 
creative crafters in the Empire is a tradition Galladinium 
is proud to continue with this latest collection of elegant 
gift ideas. 


m BIORECORDER 


... Mareoian had suspected Rekvan would propose to 
her for some time now. She could barely control her excite- 
ment when she opened the box with the small holocube and 
BioRecorder. Inserting the cube in the access slot on the 
BioRecorder, she pressed the play button and watched as 
the image of Rekvan spilled out over her bedroom floor. 
Before she could respond, he was saying those words she'd 
longed for so very longto hear. Simply hearingthem was not 
the end of it; even as Rekvan's image spoke lovingly of his 
feelings for her, Mareoian could somehow sense the depth 
of those feelings. Somehow, she felt the throb of Rekvan's 
pulse quickening and then racing as the words poured out 
of him. This was no simple holo-vid, she realized. 


— from Beneath The Galdronian Moon: A Modern 
Lover's Epic by Verigriss Tranex. 


When words aren't enough try going one better. Capture 
the essence of the moment itself. Ulgib MicroTronic's new 
BioRecorder offers you the opportunity to do just that. It 
uses a matrix of sensors to capture the feelings and emo- 
tions of the moment by recording the user's respiration, 
brain waves and bio-functions. The BioRecorder captures 
not just the words, but the feelings and intentions behind 
them. The result is as true-to-life as actually being there! 
Model: Ulqib MicroTronics BX-333 BioRecorder 
Type: Personal recording system 
Cost: 5,000, 50 (holocubes) 
Availability: 3 


42 


m BODY GLOVE 


Ever notice how some people always seem as fresh as 
Jovarian sun ferns, even after the most demanding day? Or 
what about those who brave the 

heat of Varadan's twin suns and 
never seem to perspire? Maybe 
it’s not a question of stress man- 
agement or biochemistry. Perhaps 
theseindividuals are smarter than 
you think. 

Perhaps they have a climate- 
controlled body glove by 
Kamperdine Clothing Specialists 
(KCS). A KCS body glove fits like a 
second skin and a network of 
tiny feedback sensors makes 
sure the central micro-proces- 
sor knows how to keep the user 
comfortable in any condition. 
Climate controls and reactant 
reservoirs are contained in an 
ornamental waistband that com- 
bines style and functionality. The 
user can pre-set climate control 
variables to adjust to both seasonal 
change and atmospheric density. At 
least that’s one form of pressure you 
need no longer worry about. 

Model: Kamperdine Clothing Specialists 
CSC-5000 
Type: Luxury temperature control suit 
Cost: 700 


Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Upper torso to foot coverage. Normal wear adds +} to 
any subsequent survival or stamina rolls in harsh environmental 
conditions. 


am BUBBLE CLOAK 


Accidents can happen, especially in space! Despite what 
they tell you in the travel promotionals, your trusty vac suit 
might not always be as close as you'd like it to be. Be safe, 
not sorry. Take measures into your own hands with the 
addition of a polymer bubble cloak to your wardrobe. In an 
emergency situation, activate the cloak, which rapidly in- 
flates into a 2-meter diameter emergency cocoon with a self- 
sealing entrance flap and enough atmosphere for two hours. 
It may be a tight squeeze, but you'll survive to complain 
about it over Chandrilan herb tea later. 

Model: Meredex Atmospherics EMS-90 


Illustrations by David Deitrick 


Fantastic Technology 


GALL ADINIUM 


CYDUCT CHEMICAL BOOSTER AVAILABLE SERUMS 


Serum Cost/Dose Duration Comments 


DiMatolin 100 ] hour Negates Dexterity penalties in high gravity environment 


(up to 1.4 standard gravities) 


Elisinandrox 250 10 hours +1D+1 to Strength or stamina to resist radiation sickness 


Gresholl 150 3 hours Negates Strength penalties in high gravity environments 


-polyforim 


(up to 2 standard gravities) 


Haladreshin 200 8 hours +1D to Perception and related skills; effective as neuro 


logical stimulant 


Requilisant 200 6 hours Negates Dexterity related penalties in low and zero gravity 


environments 


(All serums listed are available by prescription only) 


Type: Emergency shelter 

Cost: 800 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Àn Easy Dexterity roll required for removal and 
inflation within 30 seconds. Puncture and heat resistant, opaque 
bubble has a Strength of 1D+2 to resist damage and atmosphere 
loss. 


m CREDIT CHIP BIO-ENCODER 

Unlike other credit chip encryption devices that rely on 
electronic measures to prevent unauthorized use of per- 
sonal funds, the credit chip bio-encoder takes a uniquely 
biological approach to solving the problem. Using a genetic 
sample taken from the user, this device replicates a culture 
of biological organisms which are used to treat to the 
surface of the individual's credit chip. This culture is neu- 
tral-reactive when it comes into contact with the owner's 
genetic code. However, anyone else handling the biologi- 
cally-treated credit chip triggers an immediate response, 
resulting in discoloration and pain for the person who 
sought to "quietly liberate" your credits without your per- 
mission. 
Model: MerenData Credit Chip Bio-Encoder 
Type: Biological encoder 
Cost: 2,500 
Availability: 3, R or X 
Game Notes: An Easy first aid roll is required to properly encode a 
genetic sample from the owner. Attempts to access chip by unau- 
thorized agents results in 4D stun damage. 


MORE THAN A BURGLARY SYSTEM ... 


While this particular (and fairly extreme) pro- 
tective system was designed specifically for cur- 
rency and credit voucher cards, there is no reason 
this particular technology couldn't be extended to 


just about any personal belonging, including 
comlinks, datapads, weapons or anything else that 
someone wants to protect. Likewise, this product 
can be altered to serve as a simple contact poison 
delivery system. 


m CYDUCT CHEMICAL BOOSTER 


Perhaps you find yourself falling short at the least oppor- 
tune time. Don't allow the competition to pass you by! Boost 
your energies or take a medication inconspicuously with 
the cyduct chemical booster from Seselin Medicinal Elec- 
tronics. Worn as a small container on a waist or shoulder 
strap, this innocuous system uses a series of micro-sonic 
vibration injectors to deliver chemical compounds directly 
through the skin without pain or leaving a mark. The unit 
can be configured for time-released or continuous feed 
injections. 


Advisory: Neither the manufacturer nor Galladinium 
Exports assumes any responsibility for improper utilization 
of this device or subsequent medical complications by 
incorrect application of medicines other than those pre- 
scribed by a physician. Consult a medical specialist before 
using this device. 

Model: Seselin Medicinal Electronics Cyduct E-23 Booster 
Type: Interdermal injection system 


————ÁÁ——————————————————————————————————————————— S'Ó'ÓOODG € On OUO —7B-  » S Q!LMGM»M (GatVáVZMVINULNEAARPAPRAA)HIRIKKAAPEÍIPIBIEIEBIEEBIEBEIBB E ÉEBRT HD EBD DE ABB 


Fantastic Technology 


43 


Skill: First aid 

Cost: 1,250 

Availability: 3, F, R, or X 

Game Notes: An Easy first aid roll is required for first time set up. 
À variety of different chemical compounds are available from 
physicians. The booster holds up to 10 doses. 


m ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION DISPLAY 


"Would you mind showing me your vehicle powered 
flight permit, sir?" 

"Absolutely not, officer. Here, it's all in there." 

"Hm. Never seen one of these before ..." 

“You just push the red button. The blue one forwards the 
display." 

"Ah! That seems to be what I need. May I also see your 
visitor's passport?" 

"[t's in there." 

"And your registration verification?" 

"It's in there." 

“And you're personal weapon permit?" 

“It’s in there.” 

“So it is. Thank you, sir. Here's your datapad. Please step 
out of the vehicle and place your hands against the braking 
foil, please.” 

“But I showed you everything you asked for!” 

“Indeed, sir. Your vehicle powered flight permit is ex- 
pired, your visitor’s passport is not valid in this section of 
the city, your registration verification tax has not been paid, 
and your personal weapon permit was rescinded by your 
employer three days ago. You are under arrest, sir. By the 
way, we appreciate your cooperation in this matter.” 


For the person who has everything (or thought they did), 
here’s a thoughtful gift idea: the MerenData electronic 
identification and personal information display unit. With 
the IPI-1000 you no longer have to worry about lost identi- 
fication cards, permits, authorization bills, operating li- 
censes, or other important data documents. The IPI-1000 


allows the user to holographically scan any document up to 
30 centimeters long by 20 centimeters wide. Data storage is 
coded under one of 10 different security levels, with your 
personal access codes protecting each and every certifi- 
cate (stores up to 12 documents). 

Upon request, the unit displays a holo of the documents 
in question while the originals remain safely locked away. 
Recognized by all major Imperial agencies and banking 
institutions, the IPI-1000 is the safe and easy way to guard 
against document loss or unauthorized replication. 

Only certified government officials may perform docu- 
ment scans. Proper registration is subject to periodic re- 
view and/or inspection of the system and its contents. 
Storage of improperly registered or altered materials shall 
be subject to fine and/or possible criminal investigation. 
Authorized representatives of Imperial government agen- 
cies have a standard code override which will permit them 
to access secured data if the user is otherwise unable to 
provide the information required. 

Model: MerenData IPI-1000 

Type: Electronic identification/credential display 

Skill: Security 

Cost: 450 

Availability: 2, possibly F 

Game Notes: An Easy security roll is required to properly scan 
document images. 


m CHRONOMETER WITH HIDDEN 


COMPARTMENT 


This chronometer has a simple hidden compartment 
which is released by pressing the chrono-programming 
controls in a specified order. It can 
be used to hide credits, Ga 
indentification, 
datachips, vials of vari- 
ous substances or any- 
thing else which is 
smaller than four by 
four centimeters. 

This item is also 
available in a belt ver- 
sion, with a compart- 
ment that is eight centi- 
meters by six centimeters 
by three centimeters deep. 
Model: Alliwon Electronics Vennoc- 
x Chronometer 
Type: Personal chronometer 
Cost: 50, 65 (belt version) 
Availability: 1 
Design: Adam Rosenberg (15th place) 


m IYRA GRAVITY BELT 


Given their advances in gravitational science for ship- 
board use, it comes as no surprise that the [yrans would 
design a personal safety system based on gravity technol- 
ogy. Thelyra gravity belt appears as an innocuous waist belt 
to which other items can normally be attached. In an 
emergency free-fall situation, however, a belt stud control 
activates a series of gravity pulses; the net effect is a slowing 
of velocity and a gentle landing. 

Model: lyranis Gravitics Limited Gravity Belt 
Type: Gravity Belt 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 3 


44 


Fantastic Technology 


GAL IL ABINILIM 


m ORBITAL TRANSMISSION MONITOR 


Tired of the same old holo-vids? Now you can be part of 
the action — live! — with an orbital transmission monitor 
from Arantha! Listen to privileged communications from 
orbiting transports and shuttles. Hear exciting ground-to- 
orbital communication between picket ships and port au- 
thorities as they close in on suspected smugglers. Witness 
the tension as civil authorities challenge would-be system 
intruders. All this and more from the best in subspace 
civilian communications. Try Arantha the next time you 
wonder what really goes on up there. 

Model: Arantha Communications OTM-900 

Type: Subspace receiver 

Skill: Communications 

Cost: 550 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Instantaneous reception up to a range of 15 light- 
years. Àn Easy to Very Difficult communications roll is required to 
find specific frequencies (difficulty varies based on organization; 
planetary customs may be fairly easy to find but Imperial military 
communications channels are carefully hidden and knowledge of 
their frequencies is aclosely guarded secret). Decrypting scrambled 
codes or translating from other languages is another matter en- 
tirely. 


m REMOTE TEXT DATA SCANNER 


For those times when you have to deal with old-fashioned 
hard copy documents, try the remote text data scanner 
(RTDS) from Willienk Data Systems. Not just a simple optical 
character reader, the Willienk RTDS scans information and 
then flawlessly transmits it via a unit interface cable through 
a standard comlink or other communication system to your 
remote host computer, no matter how far away. 


Fantastic Technology 


. You can specify single or multiple file storage and re- 
trieval options, multiple copies and multiple downloadings. 
Automatic data verification ensures data integrity. So the 
next time you find yourself having to visit some musty 
archives on Janilis VII, be smart — send your assistant 
instead. Just make sure he's equipped with a RTDS. 
Model: Willienk Data Systems RTDS-1000 
Type: Remote text data scanner 
Skill: Communications 
Cost: 750 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: A Very Easy communications roll is required to 
properly scan hard copy datasheets; an Easy communications roll 
is required to transmit data. 


E SERVO SLIPPERS 


Not exactly a pair of warm fussy plushes, but something 
almost as useful — especially on high gravity worlds, where 
every step feels like your last. Servo slippers are foot/leg or 
hand/arm braces which use a combination of muscle stimu- 
lators, repulsor compensators and movement servos to 
provide precise movement under high gravity conditions or 
to help the impaired with motor skills. 

Model: Mahled Medical Services Servo Slippers 

Type: Repulsorlift assisted leg and arm braces 

Cost: 2,500 per pair (foot/leg or hand/arm) 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: On high gravity worlds, foot/leg braces alone negate 
Movement penalties and cut Dexterity penalties by two pips. Hand/ 
arm braces alone cut Dexterity penalties by two pips. Both foot/leg 
and hand/arm braces completely negate all Dexterity penalties. 


45 


m SIGNATURE SCENT SYNTHESIZER 


There was something very different about her. You could 
sense it the minute she walked into the room. Attractive, 
yes. But it was something else, something more basic and 
thus more alluring. Some beings are like psychic leeches, 
preying off the energies of others. She was just the opposite 
— she somehow seemed to give extra strength and energy 
to whomever she came in contact with. And such a delicate, 
delightful perfume too ... 


m SOUND BUBBLE 


What would you give for a little peace and quiet? How 
about 300 credits? That's all it takes to own a sound nega- 
tion system from Paretaine. Let the little ones cry. Let the in- 
laws chatter the night away. Within your sonic dampening 
field you can enjoy the world around you without being 
bothered by its irritating sounds. Àn inexpensive way to 
ensure domestic tranquility. 

Model: Paretaine Sonics SNS-600 

Type: Portable sound dampening system 

Cost: 300 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: An Easy sensors roll required for normal operation. 
Device can operate in two modes. In passive mode it produces a 
360- degree field out to 5 meters. Sounds emitted outside this radius 
are “absorbed”— only sounds emitted from within the bubble are 
heard within the bubble. In active mode, a 60-degree arc can be 
generated out to 10 meters. Within this arc, sound waves are 
effectively dampened, preventing any aural vibrations from being 
sensed by live or automated detectors. 


sen 


For a unique statement of individuality, consider the | 
signature scent synthesizer from Paradour. Using the latest 
advances in biochemical extraction techniques, the signa- | 
ture scent synthesizer can replicate any desired fragrance, i 
custom-tailored to your own individual mood and tastes. d 
Select from thousands of stock fragrances and mix and i 
match ingredients to match your specific needs. Up to one 
million individual custom creations can be stored in the 
unit's memory for easy recall. Try this latest marvel from 
Paradour and start turning heads tonight. 

Model: Paradour Enterprises Signature Scent Synthesizer 
Type: Computerized fragrance synthesizer and replicator 
Cost: 1,500, 150 (refills) 

Availability: 3 


m WRIST CHRONOMETER 


A chronometer with a number of useful additions, it is a 


YOUR DISCRETION IS APPRECIATED ... 


Note that some fragrances may contain biologi- 
cal ingredients (such as pheromonal additives) 
that may induce an exceptionally strong effect on 
some beings. 

In game terms, “victims” of such pheromonal 


fragrances might suffer penalties to willpowerrolls 
to avoid infatuation or resist the effects of com- 
mand, con, persuasion and similar skills. 

Enterprising characters with the appropriate 
chemistry background may concoct all kinds of 
substances with a number of physiological or psy- 
chological effects. 


miniaturized "one tool does it all" device. Of course, utility 
and miniaturization come at a price, but the convenience is 
worth the cost. 

Each watch maintains Standard Galactic time, in addi- 
tion to keeping up to 50 different local time-keeping meth- 
ods and time zones. The basic unit also has alarm, stop- 
watch and countdown functions. It is water-sealed down to 
20 meter depths. 

There are many options which can be added to the 
chronometer. The thermo-sensor will tell the wearer what 
the temperature is. The gravity sensor informs the wearer 
of the local gravity (in relation to standard gravity). The 
atmosphere sensor will do a complete analysis of the imme- 
diate atmosphere and will scan for large concentrations of 
potentially lethal gases. The comlink has a range of two 
kilometers. The droid linkup (requires comlink) allows 
constant comlinked communication with one particular 
droid; any responses by the droid can be heard audially or 


46 


Fantastic Technology 


displayed on the chronometer's viewscreen. 

Model: MicroThrust Clockwatcher 

Cost: 50 (+10 for thermo sensor; «10 for gravity sensor; «30 for 
atmosphere sensor; «50 for comlink; «50 for droid linkup) 
Availability: ! 

Design: Jason Davis (24th place) 


æ SYNOPTIC TEACHER 


Learning should always be challenging and, whenever 
possible, enjoyable. Now it can be less time-consuming than 
ever before. From Consolidated Learning comes the latest 
in direct learning transfer. The synoptic teacher is a com- 
fortable and safe way of absorbing information with a 
higher degree of active data retention than with traditional 
methods. The synoptic teacher works by transferring data 
directly to the brain at a subconscious level. The process is 
totally painless and the user can relax, learning effortlessly. 


Need to pick up a few pointers on astral navigation? Or 
how about a refresher course in Bocce? Try the synoptic 
teacher from CLS. Getting an education was never easier. 
Model: Consolidated Learning Systems Synoptic Teacher 
Type: Subconscious teaching system 
Cost: 10,500, 200-1,000 (information modules) 


Availability: 3 
Game Notes: À variety of pre-designed information learning mod- 


Fantastic Technology 


GALLADINIUM li 


ules are available on a wide variety of subjects (gamemaster should 
determine availability). Transference procedure takes between 15- 
30 minutes. Depending on the level of module content, its degree of 
technical or cultural sophistication, the user must make an Easy— 
Very Difficult Perception roll to effectively absorb the material. A 
successful roll means the user gains +1D-3D in that given skill or 
skill specialization if the character's skill level is below 5D (includ- 
ing attribute). The gamemaster is free to adjust costs, difficulties, 
skill bonus and maximum limits to any degee desired. The user may 
gain a benefit froma data module only once. 

The synoptic teacher is a favorite subconscious "brainwashing" 
tool of Imperial Intelligence and other organizations which may 
wish to plant post-hypnotic suggestions in the minds of operatives 
without their knowledge or consent. 


m TRANSLITERATOR 


Never again will you be forced to wear a professional 
party smile when, for all you know, the Cuvacian ambassa- 
dor has just made a disparaging remark about your parental 
heritage. With a CLS transliterator you can identify the off- 
color remark for what it is, and, much to your guest's 
surprise, return the complement in kind with a verbal 
repartee that will mark you as a social force to be reckoned 
with. Not simply an alien language phrase translator, the 
CLS transliterator's database is especially designed to sup- 
port its owner in a variety of social situations — in other 
words,totranslate slang phrases in an appropriate context. 
Possible utilization (e.g., complementary, sign of moderate 
displeasure, indications of confusion, or deliberate insult) 
is given. 

At the press of a button, a series of suggested replies are 
offered. The user need only selection what level of diplo- 
matic (or devastating) reply he or she wishes to answer 
with. Responses to selections are voiced with the press of 
the button, leaving the user free to maintain that oh-so- 
coldly-diplomatic smile. 

Model: Consolidated Learning Systems Transliterator 

Type: Language interpretation unit 

Skill: Communications 

Cost: 1,200 (includes 500 most common languages), 500 (module 
with 500 additional languages) 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Àn Easy communications roll is required to properly 
select up to 20 different languages to be tracked. Device is effective 
toarange of 10 meters, but aural receptors focus on nearest sounds 
first. Individual displays of phrase or word translations can either 
remain in place until manually cleared by user or clear after a pre- 
set delay period upto 15 seconds. This unit’s database contains 500 
specific “common” languages and dialects. 


47 


E^ BP 


RECREATIUN 


Whatever else it may be, the galaxy is an exciting That'll be the last time Gadsle brags his way into a game at 
place. It sometimes happens, however, that getting from my expense. Serves him right. Now maybe he ll go home and 
exciting "Point A" to exciting "Point B" can bealong and learn how professionals play. I might give him a re-match ... 
dreary affair. When you need to kill time, may we suggest say in five or 10 years. 


any of the following. Not only will they make the time go 
by, but younever know who might be willingto challenge 
you to a game or two. 


m SPHEROIDS GLOBE 


... Delindras Axt paused to line up the spherical holo- 
gram in her hand with one of another hue circling several 
centimeters to her right and above her head. After confirm- 
ing the proper angle, the three-time spheroids champion 
hurled the sphere. 

The oval image moved swiftly from her hand, speeding 
forward to strike its intended target. The second sphere 
then angled high above her head and impacted with a third. 
The latter collided with two more, all three of them careen- 
ing into the brilliant sun at the center of the holo display. 

That was the "impossible" shot the crowd had been 
waiting for. The difficult shot executed to her satisfaction, 
she smiled smugly at her Twi'lek opponent before respond- 


ing cheerfully tothe crowd. Gadsle glared back but made no Spheroids is asport that is gaining popularity every year. 
sound. With the applause of half the star system ringing in Now you can be the first to own the Sarno Tech Home 
her ears she regarded her opponent one last time. Spheroids Simulator (HSS), the only spheroids home 


THE UNIVERSAL GAME OF SPHEROIDS ... 


"It is said that the universe invented the game of 
spheroids. Certainly the game has much in common 
with the way in which planets, asteroids and comets 
interact in planetary gravity wells. Exactly who first 
invented spheroids is unclear, as several cultures 
have had equivalent versions for some time. The 
modern two-player version uses a varying number of 
spherical projections at established orbital patterns 
within a 2- to 10-meter diameter sphere, each with 
different velocities and trajectories. Each player has a 
command sphere as well as anywhere from 6-24 
spheres. 

"The object of the game is to use one's command 
sphere to strike any of the opponent's spheres, caus- 
ing them to ricochet into the 'sun' at the center of the 
grid. Each player makes an attempt, a successful 
‘plummet’ into the sun granting a second, subsequent 


48 


shot. À miss causes play to revert to one's opponent. 
Play alternates until one side has eliminated all of the 
opposing planetary spheres. Points are scored for a 
‘base’ win, in addition to bonus points for multiple 
plummets and plummets caused by secondary and 
tiertiary sphere collisions. 

“A relatively new feature is the optional use of 
'black holes, two or more of which are randomly 
positioned on the grid at the start of the game. En- 
trance of a sphere into a black hole causes the globe 
to reappear randomly somewhere else on the game 
grid. Às this adds a bit more uncertainty to the flow of 
the game, not every player enjoys risking the outcome 
of an important match to such unpredictability. Still, 
many enjoy the 'openness' this feature adds." 


— Extract from Galactic Games And Competitions, 
2(th edition, V.F.G. Corvallin, editor 


Illustrations by David Deitrick 


Fantastic Technology 


hologlobe officially sanctioned and endorsed by the Inter- 
stellar Professional Spheroids Association. Sarno Tech's 
HSS offers all the latest features including customized image 
selection, game storage and replay, black hole options, and 
two, three or more player versions, as well as automated 
computer opponents. 

Model: Sarno Technologies Home Spheroids Simulator 

Type: Holographic spheroids simulator 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Different game maneuvers are accomplished with 
various thrown weapons totals. The gamemaster may set target 
difficulties or have opponents simply make opposed skill rolls to 
see who wins a given contest. 


m DECLINATION MENTAL COMBAT GAME 


Do you enjoy challenging mind games? If so, you'll love 
Declination by Wethrenn Amusement. Declination is a men- 
tal game that is taking the Empire by storm. The object ofthe 
game is simple: maneuver a replication of an Imperial TIE 
fighter through a holographic asteroid field while eluding 
your opponent’s vessel, which is attempting to negotiate 
the same field from the opposite side. 

The actual manuevering, and indeed the power behind 
the game itself, is what sets it apart. Each Declination game 
controller is controlled by the player’s thoughts instead of 
mere manual reflexes! Headset controllers react at the 
speed of thought, propelling the holographic ships through 
an incredibly intricate holographic asteroid field. The win- 
ner in Declination can truly say that he or she has the 
superior mind — at least until the next game! 

Special adaptors allow up to eight players, allow play 
against the computer, and controls allow asteroid field 
difficulties to range from beginner to challenging for even 
the most experienced pilot. 

Model: Wethrenn Amusements, Unlimited Declination Holographic 
Game 

Type: Mental holographic game 

Cost: 3,500 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Characters may use either starfighter piloting and 
starship gunnery or Perceptionto play. Difficulties for navigating the 
asteroid field can range from Very Easy to Heroic (+10, +20, or 
more). Àctual combat rolls are opposed skill rolls, with additional 
modifiers based on the difficulty of the terrain. 


- 
- 
= 
- 
" 
- 
P" 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-— 


Fantastic Technology 


Em GLADIATOR WALKER 


Many people enjoy watching a pair of gladiator droids 
going at it, but the really adventuresome wish they could be 
in the cockpit: a part of the action! Now you can be there. 

In a special arrangement with SecuriTech, zZip Motor 
Concepts has produced a series of personal combat walk- 
ers that get you as closeto the real thing as you'll ever want 
to get. Reinforced shielding and shock absorption systems 
as well as internal fail-safe mechanisms make these gladia- 
tors safer to use than your average speeder, but with a lot 
more firepower! Discover what it means to be a vacation 
gladiator today! 


Liability Disclaimer: Despite the various protective 
measures taken to ensure safety for the occupants, indi- 
viduals placing orders for gladiator walkers must sign a 
release which frees Galladinium Exports and zZip Motor 
Concepts from any liability for personal injury or propri- 
etary damage, even in the event of defective manufacture, 
damage in transit or other performance-related problems. 
Participants take full responsibilty for the safety of them- 
selves, their opponents and all spectators. 

Craft: zZip Motor Concepts Gladiator Walker 
Type: Recreational light combat walker 
Scale: Speeder 
Skill: Walker operation: gladiator walker 
Crew: 1 
Crew Skill: Varies by individual 
Cover: Full 
Cost: 40,000 
Maneuverability: 1D+2 
Move: 20; 55 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D (main body), 4D (right-arm shield plate) 
Weapons: 
1 Light Laser Cannon 

Fire Arc: Front/left 

Skill: Vehicle blasters 

Fire Control: 1D 

Range: 5-10/20/40 

Damage: 3D+2 
Vehicle Fail-safe: lf onboard computer monitoring occupant identi- 
fies what it believes to be an imminent threat to the safety of the 
occupant, an automatic system-wide shutdown is activated. 
Availability: 3, F 
Game Notes: Above data for standard model walker. Deluxe models 
with additional enhancements and improved performance are also 
available; numerous custom modifications are also known to exist. 


49 


«J| BALL aINIUM 


'HOOLIGANISM' IN SEDRATIS CITY 


With the unexpected arrival of Hansor’s Hooli- 
gans at Sedratis City last night, the local sports 
world has focused on what must be acknowledged 
as a dramatic turn of events. As is well known, 
Madrix Hansor and his four teammates have hada 
long-standing rivalry with Sedratis City’s premier 
gladiator walker team, Demelza’s Destructors. It is 
rumored that this rivalry goes back to before these 
two captains were in the Core Gladiator Walker 
League! 

The grudge goes back to an incident in the 
Dalcretti system, when both team captains were 
members of an Imperial Army unit cut off by Rebel 
insurgents. As the story goes, Demelza Mintori was 
unable (or refused) to lend assistance to Hansor’s 
platoon; Hansor vowed personal revenge. 

Whatever the truth of the matter, there is bad 
blood between the two teams. Only once before 
have individual members of both gladiator teams 
met, that being the 12th Solassi Interzonals Chal- 
lenge Match two years ago. On that occasion both 
Madrix Hansor and Jandri Garn, Demelza’s point 
guard, suffered such damage to their machines 
that the match was declared a draw and neither 
participant advanced to the next round! 

Few believed that Hansor would actually travel 
this far to issue a personal team challenge. But that 
is exactly what has transpired. Having apparently 
worked out the details in secret with local promot- 
ers months ago, Hansor’s team has taken up resi- 
dence in the Sedratis Coliseum and has issued a 
challenge to the Destructors to evict him if they 
can! Though the challenge was issued less than 12 
hours ago, electronic ticketing systems are already 
swamped with demands from excited patrons who 
are eager for tickets starting at 500 credits. Asellout 
is expected by this evening. This may well prove to 
be The Big One! 


m GRAV-BALL SPORT LIFTER 


The sport of grav-ball is one of the most popular aerial 
sports in the Colonies and Core Worlds today. Now you too 
can compete in style with the newest sport lifter from Nen- 
Carvon. The Nen-Carvon grav-ball sport lifter offers both 
rapid acceleration and high maneuverability. Reinforced 
hull bracing resist damage caused by those sudden impacts 
that are part of the game. Twin repulsor pods increase your 
chances of making that difficult shot. Complete with on- 
board diagnostics for pre-flight checks and a two year 
warranty against mechanical defects. It’s just the thing you 
need for those close encounters 50 meters up ... 


"Grav-ball started out as a Rodian hunting competition 
that was supposed to hone an individual's marksmanship 
and agility in a three-dimensional combat situation. The 
object of the gameis to propel a small spheroid across your 
opponent's goal line using low-power repulsor blasts to 
nudge the object along. Far from being a simple child's 
game, this spectacular sport is played with repulsorlift 


50 


harnesses on a field 150 meters long, 50 meters wide and 50 
meters high! A small repulsor module inside the ball itself 
keeps things rolling with random and erratic motion. [n 
typical Rodian fashion, each member of the 15-member 
teams is expected to carry personal weapons with which to 
‘discourage’ their opponents in close quarters. At the orga- 
nized level, the emphasis is placed on non-lethal, melee stun 
weapons, but some local games are a good deal more 
bloodthirsty.” 


— Extract from Galactic Games And Competitions, 27th 
edition, V.F.G. Corvallin, editor. 


Craft: Nen-Carvon Sport Lifter CSL-1 
Type: Repulsorlift sport vehicle 
Scale: Character 
Length: 1.4 meters tall 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation 
Crew: 1 
Cover: 1/4 
Cost: 12,000 
Availability: 2 
Altitude Range: Ground level-50 meters 
Maneuverability: 1D+2 
Move: 60; 220 kmh 
Body Strength: 3D+2 
Weapons: 
Twin Grav-Ball Repulsor Pods (fire-linked) 

Fire Arc: Front 

Crew: 1 

Skill: Vehicle blasters 

Fire Control: 1D 

Range: 1-3/4/5 

Damage: 1D 
Game Notes: The above is a common grav-ball sport lifter. Other 
variants exist, with longer-ranged repulsor pods for professional 
tournament play. Personal units may sport any number of custom- 
ized modifications, depending upon local league rules. 


i GRAV BOOTS 


Tired of playing in contests that limit your field of move- 
ment to horizontal gridlines? Corgorlath Leisure now gives 
you an added dimension of play with the purchase of a pair 
of grav boots. Using repulsorlift fields, these boots allow for 
rapid maneuvering along planes anywhere from 45-180 
degrees opposite normal gravity. Experience what it's like 
to see the world from an entirely new perspective. Satisfac- 
tion guaranteed. 

Model: Corgorlath Leisure Articles Master-Grav 1000 


Fantastic Technology 


Type: Grav boots 

Cost: 550 (pair) 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Move is up to 20 meters per turn and maximum 
altitude is 150 meters. Theunit is relatively quiet. Various difficulty 
maneuvers may be attempted, using the powersuit operation skill. 


iB HOLOMATIC DEJARIK SET 

Vacor.looked over the gold and green squares for the 
hundredth time. There was little doubt about it: Baas had 
out maneuvered him. The more he studied the board, the 
more he had to admire his play. The attacking combination 
had materialized seemingly out of nowhere, devastating in 
impact, subtle in execution. Vacor looked across the board 
at the thin man in the plesticene suit. Vacor couldn't help 
thinking Baas looked more like a banker than a grandmas- 
ter. He smiled at the champion. 

"Your reputation does not do you justice, Master Baas." 

"You put up a fair fight, young man. Keep playing that 
way and some day I may have to start getting worried." 

High praise coming from so talented a performer! Vacor 
leaned over the table, intending to shake his opponent's 
hand. In the process, he inadvertently tipped over his 
Holdfast, the traditional, unspoken signal of defeat. With 
that, the program ended and the hologram of the long dead 
master Krestin Baas disappeared just as he was about to 
take Vacor's hand. 

Vacor sighed in frustration. Well, maybe next time ... 


Since its inception, no other game has withstood the test 
of time as has dejarik. While the exact origin of this board 
game continues to generate debate among scholars and 
game aficionados, few will argue about the challenge and 
pleasure of a good game of dejarik. 

Your dejarik games can comealive with Lakan Industries's 
newest version of their popular hologram dejarik set. Now 
players can select from one of 10 different types of playing 
pieces (in both static and live-action modes). In addition to 
an improved artificial intelligence (based on the Lakan 
"engine" that camein second at the Galactic Core Interzonals 
two years ago), an expanded data module allows you to 
replicate the playing style of over 50 of the galaxy’s finest 
dejarik grandmasters. Ever wonder how you might have 
faired against some of history’s best players? 

Novices and professionals alike will delight in the use of 
this new way to play a classic game of skill and strategy. 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI. 


The hologram generator is housed within a table-sized, 
circular mount with board outlines etched in the top sur- 
face. Control studs for power settings, module insertion, 
and parameter settings are contained along the outer rim. 
When activated, a three-dimensional, multi-colored holo- 
gram of pieces (ranging in size from 5-30 centimeters in 
height) is displayed. Players enter in their move (as per 
standard dejarik transcription code) into their respective 
datapads on either end of the generator housing. In passive 
mode, the moves are immediately recorded and a resulting 
update ofthe board's display is shown. In live-action modes, 
players can witness the physical movement of their se- 
lected piece as it travels across the board, waging war with 
the opponent's pieces, and occasionally devouring the 
loser. Different pieces and extra grandmaster modules are 
available. 

Model: Lakan Industries DHS-2 

Type: Holographic dejarik system 

Skill: Scholar: dejarik (a Knowledge skill) 
Cost: 1,500, 100 (additional data modules) 
Availability: 2 


m IMPERIAL COMMAND COMBAT SIMULATOR 


The Siege of Trasemene! The Assault on Vardoss IV! The 
Battle of Galboron! Names that will forever live in the annals 
of Imperial military history ... and now you can see if you 
have the brilliance to match those who fought there! 

With Plescinia's newest addition to its "Great Battles of 
the Empire" series, you can holographically recreate these 
and other landmark military engagements in striking detail. 
Play against another opponent or against the computer. 
Micro-manage individual units or expand your horizons to 
the strategic level to direct the operations of entire assault 
groups. Fighters, repulsor tanks, walkers and elite troop 
units are all here, awaiting your orders. This latest version 
allows for remote access links capable of accommodating 
multiple players. Take command today! 

Model: Plescinia Entertainments CS-Mark 10 

Type: Computerized holographic combat simulator 

Skill: Tactics 

Cost: 350 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: In addition to the 12 “stock” historical simulations 
built into this unit, a “scenario editor” feature allows the user to 
custom create additional historical or hypothetical engagements. 
An Easy computer programming/reair roll is required to install the 
system. Game scenarios require various tactics rolls (difficulty 
varies by scenario). 


51 


m SKY SLICER 


One of the fastest growing urban environment sports is 
sky slicing. Sky slicers are a new type of swoop for a more 
daring breed of rider. Essentially a flat ellipsoid with micro- 
repulsorlift turbines placed along the bottom surface, slic- 
ers are an open-air, “no hands” approach to personal skim- 
ming. Maintaining one’s balance atop a racing slicer is 


52 


accomplished through the use of custom designed 
magboots. Control is based entirely on the rider's balance. 
While not as fast as some swoop models, the sky slicer is 
more maneuverable, and slicer aerial acrobatics are far 
more exciting to watch. An optional drogue slicer (provides 
upward lift with no forward momentum) can be used as a 
passenger carrier. When employed, a low-frequency tractor 
beam generator mounted at the rear of the slicer board 
allows the slicer rider to “tow” the trailing passenger on the 
ride of his, her or its life! 

Craft: Aratech Sky Striker 5000 

Type: Modified swoop 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 2.5 meters 

Skill: Swoop operation: sky slicer 

Crew: 1 

Crew Skill: Varies by individual 

Altitude Range: Ground level-200 meters 

Cover: None 

Cost: 3,000 (new), 300-600 (used), 500 (drogue/tractor beam addi- 
tion) 

Availability: 2 

Maneuverability: 3D 

Move: 200; 580 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D 


Fantastic Technology 


GAL! 


Our customers are a special breed. They refuse to 
accept the ordinary. Whether at work or at play, they 
never do things the way “everybody else” does. Many 
have some very extraordinary professions requiring 
some very extraordinary tools. The following section 
makes available a variety of specialized equipment you'll 
typically find hard to come by through other (dare we 
say "normal") channels. 


m BIO-COCOON 


At first glance, the bio-cocoon lo 
cloth folded up for convenient stor 
laid out to its full length, 
square meter piece of dura 
of dormant microorganism 
electrical energy produced 

When a creature walks 
remote control activated 
surface release of other 
original culture into activity. TI 
presence of the creature and resp: 
their victim, rapidly multiplying as t 
energy from their new host. With 
cocoon-like dome of living biologi 
target creature, incapacitating it. 


This unit is a particular favorite among big-game hunters 
that need to capture dangerous animals unharmed. 
Model: Dendratis Biological Exports, Incorporated Bio-Cocoon 


SPECIAL. 


Type: Biological containment system 

Cost: 2,000 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Upon activation, the intended victim must make a 

Moderate brawling parry roll to avoid entrapment (for victims up to 
150 kilograms; victims from 151-300 kilograms need only make an 

Easy roll, while 301—450 kilogram targets require a Very Easy roll; 

this unit has no effect on targets over 450 kilograms). 

Failure results in an immediate -1D Dexterity penalty and 1D stun 

se the brawling parry difficulty to escape by one 
onal ti n and increase the Dexterity penalty by -1D 

mage by «1D. Thetarget is fully cocooned 

alty matches or exceeds the character's 

mage is sufficient to knock out the charac- 


KS FOR YOU ... 


m is registered as a wild 
y hunters often employ 
cjalized" captures. 


S a specially designed, full spectrum 


c OE countermeasures (ECM) device mounted aboard 


ed as a standard probe/launcher system. 

t ato th 'ship's sublight drive and navigational 
systems, the copycat’s onboard computer analyzes the 
parent craft’s transponder signature and other flight dy- 
namics. 


When launched, the device goes active, immediately 
mimicking the parent vessel’s flight characteristics in an 


IIlustrations by Brian Schomburg 


Fantastic Technology 


53 


J| SALLADINIUM 


attempt to lure pursuing opponents off course. 

Model: Corellian Engineering Corporation Copycat Pod 

Type: Electronic countermeasures probe 

Skill: Sensors 

Cost: 10,000 (plus permit fees) 

Availability: 3, F or R 

Game Notes: This device mimics the performance of the parent 
vessel when used aboard a starfighter or small transport freighter 
(ship with a cargo hold of 100 metric tons or less); it has a maximum 
Space speed of 6. 

Any person attempting to distinguish a copycat pod from a “live” 
vessel must make a Difficult sensors roll on passive or scan mode 
(Moderate on search mode and Easy on focus mode) to detemine 
which ship is real and which is the decoy. If the roll fails, the sensor 
operator will perceive both ships as being “real.” 


BE ADVISED ... 


While accepted as a piracy deterrent, stiff penal- 
ties are levied against those convicted of using this 
device to deceive Imperial or local law enforce- 
ment agents or to assist piracy, Rebel activity or in 
any other way contribute to violating Imperial law. 

Local bureaucrats strictly scrutinize permit ap- 
plications for copycat pods. Specific permit fees 
will vary by individual system (typically 500-2,500 
credits), but a legitimate reason for the pod's ne- 
cessity must be presented. 

Unauthorized use of this device is a class three 
infraction under Imperial criminal regulations and 
subject to a fine of up to 3,000 credits, up to three 
standard months in jail, a one year suspension of 
the pilot's license and possible confiscation of the 
pilot's ship. Additional charges may result from 
any illegal activities conducted while in possession 
of a copycat pod. 

Any orders of a copycat pod placed with 
Galladinium Exports will be expedited as soon as 
the appropriate permit registration has been filed 
and approved. Galladinium is authorized to accept 
fee payments with your original order. Contact 
your nearest Galladinium office for permit rates in 
your system. 


im EVA VACUUM POD 


When you have to face the vacuum of space to effect 
emergency ship repairs, make sure you have the best 
equipment for the job. That means using Regallis 
Engineering's extra-vehicular activity (EVA) vacuum pod, 
which uses a droid brain to carry out voice-activated com- 
mands to maintain a stationary position, adjust thrust for 
matching momentum and trajectory and monitor vital life 
signs. [n other words, the droid brain handles the mundane 
tasks so you can concentrate on locking down that pesky 
alluvial damper and get back inside where you belong! 
Craft: Regallis Engineering EVA vacuum pod 
Type: Droid-monitored space pod 
Scale: Character 
Length: 3 meters in height; 1.2 meters wide 
Skill: Powersuit operation: repair pod 
Crew: 1 
Cover: Full 
Cost: 15,000 
Manueverability: 1D 


54 


Move: 55; 160 kmh 

Body Strength: 4D 

Game Notes: Life support systems capable of functioning for 2 
hours. Has full comlink system and a number of attachments for the 
two forward arms, plus an exterior "storage pouch" of additional 
attachments. An annual maintenance overhaul of each pod (Easy 
powersuit repair total) is required. 


m OXIDIZER 


This oxidizer resembles a re-breather unit, except the 
larger filtration unit is worn at the waist and connects to a 
standard breather mask. The oxidizer enables oxygen mol- 
ecules to be extracted from atmospheres principally formed 
of methane, ammonia and other gases. It is used primarily 
by scouts and planetary prospectors, but can easily func- 
tion as part of any emergency survival kit. Providing local 
atmospheric pressure is not too great, the oxidizer’s filtra- 
tion system can extract oxygen molecules, working in prin- 
ciple like a miniaturized “ram-jet,” drawing in the surround- 
ing gas and filtering out unwanted elements. Normal opera- 
tion is up to four hours on a full power pack charge. 
Model: Gandorthral Atmospherics Oxidizer 
Type: Molecular oxygen extractor 
Cost: 350 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Power pack recharging takes one hour. 


im LASER WELDER 


Whether making repairs to your starship or just doing 
some body work on the old speeder, no repair job is too big 
for the Borallis LSW-983 laser welder. Using two indepen- 
dently directed laser emitters to increase efficiency, this 
laser welder is powerful, yet safe to operate. 

A built-in power cell provides for portability, while a 
standard adaptor hookup allows for direct access to most 
power systems. Each laser beam can be finely turned to 
provide a variable degree of surface contact, allowing for 
welds ranging from 0.2-20 centimeters in diameter. 

Model: Borallis Metalworking & Materials LSW-983 Laser Welder 
Type: Laser welder 

Skill: Various repair skills 

Cost: 50 

Availability: 1 


Fantastic Technology 


m ILF-5000 LIFEFORM SCANNER 


Exploration of any sort demands the highest quality 
equipment for maximum results. When you need to know 
what, how many and how fast those “somethings” are 
approaching from over the ridge, use the Idellian ILF-5000 
lifeform scanner. The ILF-5000 is pre-programmed to distin- 
guish among thousands of common animal lifeforms. 


For more information on personal sensors, see Star Wars 
Adventure Journal #4, pages 260-264. 
Model: Idellian Arrays ILF-5000 Lifeform Scanner 
Type: Lifeform scanner 
Skill: Sensors 
Cost: 3,500 
Availability: 2 
Range: 500/1/1.5 km 
Game Notes: A sensors roll is required to use the device; the 
difficulty depends upon the conditions as described in the sensors 
rules in the Star Wars Adventure Journal. 
In addition to providing the number of lifeforms detected, and rate 
and direction of movement, the unit will inform the user ifthe body 
function parameters match or are similar to any of the lifeforms pre- 
programmed into the unit's database. The unit will inform the user 
of the detected targets' body temperature, mass and respiration 
rates. Users may make an alien species or beast riding total to 
determine which lifeform is detected if such an attempt is reason- 
able in the gamemaster's opinion. 


m MICRO FUSION REACTOR 


If you're going to be out in the wilderness, you'll need 
something to power your perimeter shields ... and that 
portable entertainment system you packed in under the 
survival rations. This unit is a reactor that supplies the 
power of most "medium" generators in a backpack-sized 
unit. 

Model: Lardanis Survival Systems MFCR-200 Power Generator 
Type: Medium fusion power generator 

Cost: 750 

Availability: 1 


m MINERAL EXTRACTOR 


Prospecting seems like a romantic way to make a for- 
tune. While the reality can be far harsher, if you're going to 
mine asteroids, you might was well do it the right way! 

The Tagge Mining Co. AEA-500 mineral extractor is a two 
person self-contained mining extractor for use in low or 
zero-gravity environments. Localized magnetic fields an- 
chor the vehicle in place while the dig operator selects the 
type of mineral to be extracted from beneath the surface. 
Tri-beam lasers chip away waste materials while scanners 
home in on those valuable minerals. Interior plasma units 
filter valuable minerals and ores out of the raw material fed 


into the unit. 


Fantastic Technology 


Craft: Tagge Mining Co. AEA-500 Mineral Extractor 
Type: Contained mining vehicle 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 20 meters 

Crew: 2 (driver, dig operator) 

Cargo Capacity: 10 metric tons 

Cover: Full 

Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 
Cost: 25,000 

Manueverability: 1D 

Move: 30; 160 kmh 

Body Strength: 2D 

Game Notes: Mining lasers do 5D damage. 


m FUSION CUTTER 


Trust your power cutting needs to the fusion cutter from 
Borallis Metalworking. This variable beam fusion cutter can 
shear through most metals, plastics and ceramics up to 25 
centimeters thick in a matter of seconds. 

Model: Borallis Metalworking & Materials PCW-876 

Type: Fusion cutter 

Skill: Various repair skills 

Cost: 75 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: Difficulty level when usingthis deviceis dependent on 
the project involved. Accidental exposure to beam causes 3D-6D 
(variable) damage. 


m REPULSORLIFT GRAPPLING GUN 


This device combines traditional gappling gun technol- 
ogy with modern repulsorlift generators. In addition to 
usingarocketto propelthe grappleupto its destination, the 
repulsorlift grappling gun uses a small repulsorlift drive to 
insure the traget hits its target. The gun has two distinct 
modes. 

Mode 1: The gun acts as a normal grappling gun in that 
it fires a grappling hook upward. 

Mode 2: In this mode, the gun fires as normal, but the 
owner controls the rate of ascent and direction with a small 
thumb operated joystick built into the gun. The grappling 
hook can move up as fast or as slow as the owner desires. 
This allows the grappling hook to be placed where the 
owner really wants it. The charge on the grappling hook will 
only last 30 seconds. 

Asmall automatic winch allows the owner to pull himself 
upward. The third setting on the selector switch allows the 
owner to adjust rate of assent using the thumb joystick. 

There are two versions of the repulsorlift grappling gun. 

Gun: This version looks like an over-sized blaster. The 
joystick is located just above the handle. A standard blaster 
pack is good for 10 launchings. 200 meters of molecularly- 
reinforced line is stored in the gun. The automatic winch 
pulls the owner up at 20 meters per second. It is recom- 
mended that the optional harness also be used. The winch 
will support up to 200 kilograms. 

Wrist: This version fits over the forearm of the owner. À 
snap-up handle swings out when activated. The handle 
contains the thumb joystick, mode selector switch, and 
launch toggle. The wrist version uses the same power pack 
as a hold-out blaster. It gets five launchers per power pack 
and contains only 100 meters of line, ascends at a rate of 10 
meters per second and supports 150 kilograms. The major 
advantage is a smaller (almost concealable) unit. 

Model: Zone Control Repulsor Grappling Gun 
Type: Repulsor grappling gun 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Cost: 1,200 (gun), 1,000 (wrist) 


55 


WY 


SERVO LIFTER 


SQUIB 
BATTERING RAM 


REPULSORLIFT GRAPPLING 
GUN 


FUSION CUTTER 


ILF 5000 


MICRO FUSION 
REACTOR 
OXYGEN 
EXTRACTOR 


LASER WELDER 


Fantastic Technology 


56 


DAI. I. ANMNILIM 


Availability: 2 
Design: Michael Zebrowski (1st place) 


E SERVO-LIFTER 


When you have a big job to do, there's no reason to break 
your back doing it. Whenever there is heavy lifting and short 
distance hauling to be done, let a Verekil servo-lifter take 
the strain off your shoulders. 

Craft: Verekil Servo-Lifter V-2z 

Type: Servo-enhanced exo-skeleton 
Scale: Character 

Length: 3 meters tall 

Skill: Powersuit operation: servo-lifter 
Crew: 1 

Cost: 10,000 (new); 7,000 (used) 
Availability: 3 

Manueverability: 1D 

Move: 30; 90 kmh 

Body Strength: 2D 

Game Notes: Can lift up to 1.5 metric tons. 


m SQUIB BATTERING RAM 


This device looks like a shoulder mounted weapon with 
alarge, square plate at the muzzle end. This plateis clamped 
against the surface of the target obstruction. When acti- 
vated, alternating energy pulsations batter away at the 
obstruction until, weakened at a molecular level, it eventu- 
ally gives way. 

Model: Fegegrish Heavy Industrials Battering Ram 

Type: Structural weakener 

Cost: 3,500 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Device batters through solid obstacles, effectively 
doing 6D damage against the body of a wall or door. 


WE DIDNT KNOW IT WOULD DO 
THAT! 


Although the Squibs would never admit it, this 
battering ram is also a great way to get into a locked 
financial institution in order to make that all impor- 
tant, after-hours withdrawal. 


m OXYGEN EXTRACTOR 
Useful in (but not limited to) desert environments, a 

Fabrennix oxygen extractor uses a meter-long probe to 
extract oxygen molecules from sub-surface water deposits 
or water vapor trapped in rock formations. Modulated wave 
pulses separate the water and oxygen from the surrounding 
rock, drawing it to the surface and into the unit’s storage 
tank. The extractor can function in a vacuum and weightless 
conditions. 
Model: Vercanne Mineral Technologies FOE-2000 
Type: Oxygen extractor 
Cost: 350 
Availability: 2 


i VERSATEX SURVIVAL SUIT 


The Vectac Versatex survival suit is an all-purpose, all- 
terrain outfit. Made of Versatex (a thin, micro-capillaried 
fabric), the suit can handle extremes of temperature, mois- 
ture and pressure. It is waterproof and tear resistant, yet in 
dry environments the suit’s sensors will begin recycling the 
user’s moisture and accept limited amounts of moisture in 
from the outside environment. A small heating, cooling and 
air filter-recirculation unit is in the unit’s backpack, with 
controls on the belt. In cool environments, the micro- 


capillaries circulate heated insulation fluids; these same 
fluids contain cooling agents for hot environments. The 
suit’s protection ranges from temperatures as low as -30° 
Centigrade to as high as 100° Centigrade. 


The suit’s microcapillaries have a limited camouflage 
system. There is a color sensor on the belt: the wearer need 
only flip open the protective cover, expose the sensor to the 
desired color, and then custom tinted dyes will be injected 
into the micro-capillary liquids, allow the suit to change its 
outer color to match the environment. This change takes 
approximately two minutes. Replacement dye concentrate 
capsules are five credits each: there are five colors (black, 
white, red, blue and yellow) which can be blended and 
mixed for a specific color. The user can also purchased pre- 
mixed color dyes to guarantee a perfect match. The camou- 
flage capability adds +1D to the wearer’s sneak roll. 

The suit’s helmet can be open-faced, or sealed against 
the elements and patched into the cooling/heating system. 
The helmet has a built-in comlink, breath mask and glowlamp. 

The suit also has optional, strap-on armor plating for the 
torso, legs and arms (this armor is also micro-capillaried, so 
it retains the color-changing capability and provides +1D 
physical and +2 energy protection). The armor plates cost 
an additional 150 credits. 

Model: Vectac Systems Inc. Versatex Survival Suit 
Type: Personal survival suit 

Cost: 900, 150 (armor plates) 

Availability: 2 

Design: Jim Tews (18th place) 


im VERPINE ASTEROID DIRECTOR 


Designed by Verpine master technologists fromthe Roche 
system, the heart of this device is a 10-meter long, energy 
conversion thruster. Essentially, the Verpine asteroid di- 
rector takes the dross (waste material from the initial 
mining process) and vaporizes it in a controlled fusion 
reaction, providing the thrust to move the asteroid to a 
central mining location. 

This unit can also be set for a “pure conversion” process 
for asteroids where the objective is to merely move the 
asteroid rather than mine any material from it. 

A single Verpine asteroid director is capable of moving a 
small body up to 50 metric tons in bulk. Multiple directors 
can be sequentially placed and remotely linked to maneu- 


-——————————————————————————————————————À———————————————ÁM'ÉÓÁOÓ SSS SSS SSS Sn SSS SSS SSS isp is SS iS 


Fantastic Technology 


57 


ver larger objects. 

Model: SlaynRoche Co. Verpine Asteroid Director 

Type: Asteroid propulsion unit 

Cost: 12,500 

Availability: 2 

Space: 1 

Game Notes: Mechanical totals (skill is thrust unit piloting, a very 
rare skill) are required to keep asteroid on course (difficulty varies 
by specific task). Aside from mining, this unit can be used to move 
asteroids out of commercial shipping lanes, to build a "natural" 
defense network or to drop asteroids on unfortunate worlds with- 
out adequate shielding ... 


ii NEURAL CONTROL COLLAR 


The neural control collar is a preferred tool for working 
with dangerous beasts. These collars are routinely used by 
zoologists, animal handlers and big game capture special- 
ists. 

A neural control collar works by overriding an animal's 
control of voluntary muscles. This is done by making an 
attack against the animal's nevous system (causes 7D stun 
damage). This attackis resisted by thetarget's Strength. The 


58 


animals is otherwise conscious and aware of its surround- 
ings. In order to work properly, the collar must be fitted 
around the neck. Droids and lifeforms without a central 
nervous system are immune to these collars. 

The neural control collar consists of two parts. The main 
part is an armored collar, which normally has a lock (the 
lock can be of any type, but is traditionally a six-digit 
combination mechanical unit). The collar is powered by a 
simple power cell. 

The second part is the control computer. This is usually 
a wrist-mounted bracelet or a central computer in a major 
complex, but it can also be a droid modification. The 
computer is equipped with a keypad for giving instructions 
and sufficient memory to contain 400 words of common 
instructions such as, "Do not try to remove collar." 

À central computer can control up to 50 collars that are 
keyed to it and the remote unit has a range of five kilome- 
ters. A collar that is moved out of range of its control unit 
will automatically make its wearer return to the control unit 
and inflict pain (6D damage). Many planets have outlawed 
neural control collars, especially in the Core. 

Model: Cybersoft Corp. Neural Control Collar 

Type: Animal control device 

Cost: 600 (one collar and basic control computer), 300 (collar only), 
1,000 (control computer for use with multiple collars) 
Availability: 2, R 

Design: Douglas M. Burck (2nd prize) 


Fantastic Technology 


BALLADINIUM f 


SURVEILLANCE AND SUCH 


In today’s competitive business environmenttheneed aas DALABAR SURVEILLANCE DETECTOR 


to know, obtain, and be able to protect valuable informa- For over two decades, Dalabar Micro-Electronics has 
tion is critical. Industrial espionage is, regrettably, a fact been serving the needs of security conscious customers 
of life on many planets. Responsible persons must take with a well-earned reputation for discretion and quality 
steps to protect themselves and their data from unau- merchandise. Whether the need is corporate or personal, 
thorized surveillance. Sometimes the best defense is a Dalabar restores peace of mind with the SDS-632, a palm- 


sized surveillance scanner that can effectively sweep an 
area of 30 cubic meters in under 60 seconds. 

pick up even the faintest trace of a 
ave, be that signal in the infrared, 
calized subspace bands. Where other 
ck only for aural pickups, the SDS-632 


good offense! The following Galladinium offerings will 
provide the user with a competitive edge no matter how 
you play the game. 


im BITH COMPUTER RETINAL 


The Bith computer retinal lock i 
ning system that provides 
files only to those individu 
patterns match those in th 
stalled, system activation p 
to be a series of colorful di 
ematical patterns. This fa: 
guises a series of composit 
constructed, wafer-thin scanner t 
monitor display itself. These com 
pared with authorized patterns. W 
to the computer system as a whole, t 
denied access to any data previous 
lockout. This system also permits the 
copy of the intruder's retinal patter 
authorities. 
Model: Veredictas CompuTechnology Bith Computer Retinal Lock 
Type: Computer security system 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 1,200 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: An Easy computer programming/roll roll is required 
for installation. Once in place, only a retinal falsification system will 
allow unauthorized users to access secured files. 


detection sources can be assumed, 
of complete security. 


[ 
C ng 


.-— 9 9 NN LLL LUUD E" 


UY 


yos 


: + 
LX 
XS 


FILI 


HIustrations by Matt Busch 


Fantastic Technology 59 


Model: Dalabar Micro-Electronics SDS-632 

Type: Personal surveillance detector 

Skill: Sensors 

Cost: 450 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: The SDS-632 scans an area with a sensors skill of 5D. 
For an additional 175 credits, the optional noise inhibitor (NI-632) 
blocks aural receptors by blanketing a 10-meter diameter area with 
sonic disturbances to match the frequency ofthe sensors detected. 


m DATA BIO-ENCYRPTOR 


This small, palm-sized, chip encoding system provides a 
maximum level of data security when transferring data from 
one place to another; it is used by couriers throughout the 
Empire. This system can safely secure the equivalent of 
three full data chips. The data is written onto a micro-chip, 
which is then encased in a tiny jell-like capsule. The capsule 
is physically ingested by the owner. The capsule's surface 
contains a special chemical coating that prohibits normal 
digestion and has a mild time-released reactant that trig- 
gers regurgitation (time-release coating can be set for any- 
where from 20 to 200 hours later). 

Having arrived at one's destination, the capsule is ex- 
pelled. The retrieved capsule can then be reloaded into a 
chip encoder and the contents accessed. 


The advantage of such a system is the lack of any 
evidence of data transport. Only very sensitive scanners 
and trained personnel knowing exactly what to look for can 


ME? A SECRET AGENT? W/HAT AN 
IDEA! 


One of the many advantages of using the bio- 
encryption system is that just about anyone can 
use it. Itis possible to use it on a given party without 
that person necessarily being aware of what is 
going on. Either by disguising the data capsuleasa 
type of medicine or by hiding it as part of a larger 
meal, the unsuspecting courier can honestly say he 
or she knows nothing about any stolen documents 
and pass any lie detection testing. 

At the other end, arrangements can be made to 
transport the unsuspecting agent toanearby “medi- 
cal facility.” Despite what one might think, the 
retrieval of the datachip is far less discomforting 
than most people would suspect. 


60 


E SBALILANNIUM GZ MNILIM 


detect the presence of the packet. 

Model: Servenidain Securities, Limited Data Bio-Encryptor 

Type: Data transfer system 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 25,000 

Availability: 3, R 

Game Notes: An Easy computer programming/repair roll is required 
tosuccessfully download and encrypt the desired information or to 
safely upload data upon arrival at one's destination. Detection of 
ingested data capsule requires a Heroic sensors roll. 


E EYE IN THE SKY 


Two heads are often better than one — and two extra 
eyes and ears to match. This is the reasoning behind the 
invention of the "Eye in the Sky" — a portable, free-flight 
monitor sphere from Kystallio Detection. With this nimble 


little device at your disposal you can keep watch on any 
designated member of your family from a distance or main- 
tain a panoramic watch over your surroundings. Pick from 
over a dozen specially modulated frequencies from which 
to tie audio and visual feeds into your host computer or 
portable datapad. The eye globe can be programmed for 
over 20 different flight patterns or can be set to automati- 
cally “heel” at a safe altitude, unobtrusively following you or 
your subject at a distance up to 100 meters away. See what 
you've been missing by trying an extra set of eyes and ears, 
courtesy of Kystallio. 

Model: Kystallio Detection Plus RMD-20 Eye In The Sky 

Type: Remote monitoring device 

Skill: Sensors 

Altitude Range: Ground level-200 meters 

Cost: 800 

Availability: 2 

Move: 45; 130 kmh 

Game Notes: An Easy sensors roll required for initial activation 
only. Free flight operation is automatic. The device appears as a 30- 
centimeter diameter sphere studded with sensory apparatus and 
micro-repulsorlift nodes. Maximum hover height is 200 meters, 
maximum range is 10 kilometers, and maximum flight before power 
cell recharge is 5 hours. Contains audio and visual sensors feeds to 
the user operate out to 100 meters radius. 


Fantastic Technology 


E GOTAL ELECTROMAGNETIC SCANNER 


Every being with a central nervous system gives off a 
certain degree of electromagnetic radiation. With the right 
instruments, this radiation can be measured and some 
species, such as the Gotal, are particularly sensitive to this 
radiation. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Gotals 
devised a scanner attuned to this particular form of back- 
ground radiation. The Gotal electromagnetic scanner can 
return a visual image of living beings (or other radiation 
sources) otherwise hidden behind or underneath layers of 
covering material. While information is limited to outline 
approximations, this short range scanning device is helpful 
in detecting the whereabouts of individuals trapped in 
mining accidents or as a security device. 

Model: Vreshann Electronics, Incorporated EMS Scanner 
Type: Electromagnetic radiation scanner 

Skill: Sensors 

Cost: 2,500 

Availability: 3 


Game Notes: À Moderate sensors roll is required to detect electro- 
magnetic emissions within a 100 meter radius. A Difficult sensors 
roll is required to detect life-forms behind walled enclosures or 
other blocking materials. Information readouts are limited to pro- 
viding data on the number of persons present, approximate size 
and mass. 


E HEAT POD 

One way to neutralize heat sensor systems is to give 
them more than they can handle. Àn easy way to accom- 
plish this is through the use of a heat pod. Heat pods are 
grenade-sized heat generators which can bedeployed manu- 
ally or with grenade launchers. Once activated, they emit an 
ever-widening zone of light and heat, effectively blanketing 
an area up to 20 meters in radius. Once in place, the 
operator can slip under the cover of the more powerful 
generators. Each pods lasts for 15 minutes. 
Model: Dalesepp Survival Apparatus HPD-100 Heat Pod 
Type: Heat generator 
Skill: Thrown weapons 
Cost: 70 
Availability: 3, F 


DAI.I 


Game Notes: Once employed, increases the difficulty of heat-based 
sensors or tracking systems by two levels (may vary depending 
upon type of information sought, distance from actual target and 
other factors). 


m HUSHER MIKE 


By using the latest in cybernetic miniaturization, the 
husher mike offers a new approach to the discrete transmis- 
sion of information. The husher mike implant works by 
amplifying vocal cord vibrations and converting them into 
electrical impulses. Short-range transponders (the only 
portion of the mike implant that's visible; they're located on 
either side ofthe neck) transmit these impulses along a pre- 
set frequency which is normally monitored by a receiver. In 
this manner, virtually silent, unobservable communication 
can be carried out in a crowded environment. 

Model: Crozo Industrial Products At-cyb Husher Mike 

Type: Vocal communications implant 

Cost: 3,000 (mike and receiver; implantation surgery is extra) 
Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Effective operating range is 1 kilometer. This device 
offers one way transmission of voice only and does not cover 
reception of voice or data transmissions. 


Fantastic Technology 


61 


J| G4LLADINIUM 


ARE YOU SURE IT'S JUST A SORE 
THROAT ... 


The husher mike offers a wide-range of espio- 
nage opportunities. Given the lack of any commu- 
nication device in hand, this implant mike offers a 
very discrete means of sending information. 


m POCKET SCRAMBLER 

Privacy is the name of the game when you have the 
pocket scrambler on your side. Simply attach the Varge 
Corp. PS-xqt9s to any device using standard communica- 
tions protocols (such as a comlink). The pocket scrambler 
works by modulating communication frequencies with 
scrambling signals that insure that your signal will not be 
decoded unless your authorized receiver has a PS-xqt9s 
scrambler and the right encryption code. With over five 
million possible codes, unauthorized decryption is virtu- 
ally impossible! 
Model: Varge Corp. PS-xqt9s Pocket Scrambler 
Type: Data encryption device 
Skill: Security 
Cost: 800 
Availability: 4,F or R 
Game Notes: Àn Easy communications roll is required for normal 
use. Without a similar device and the appropriate encryption code, 
a Very Difficult to Heroic communications roll is necessary to 
decrypt messages. 


m TAGGER 

What may appear at first to be an ordinary datapad 
stylus is, in reality, a convenient way of keeping tabs on 
important people. The tagger is a remote surveillance track- 
ing device. The business end of the tagger is a small (5 
millimeter diameter) transponder node dart. The tagger 
stylus has a small amount of pressurized gas to silently 
propel the transponder up to 5 meters. 

Once attached to its target “host,” the device sends out 
an intermittent high-frequency signal which the tagger re- 
ceiver component can pick upto 1.2 kilometers away. As the 
tracking signal is broadcast only intermittently (approxi- 
mately once every 5 minutes) it is hard for unauthorized 


i ARATECH R82 JUMP BOOTS 


receivers to detect. Thetransponder dart operates for upto 
40 standard hours. 

Model: Culcanis MicroInstruments Tagger 

Type: Remote surveillance tracking tool 

Cost: 250 

Availability: 3,F 


y j 


À combination repulsor and rocket unit, these boots are 
lighter than standard rocket packs and allow the user to 
make boosted jumps or use the repulsor pack for simple 
gliding. 

Thin, strong cables are drawn to the knee and usually 
attached tothe pants or leggings for additional support and 
to reduce strain on the feet and lower legs. Control cables 
are long enough to reach the user's hands. These boots are 
most commonly used for anumber of games and sports, but 
they can have their uses in the field as well. 

Model: Aratech R82 Jump Boots 
Type: Repulsor boots 


V Y 


| 


im 
= 
= 
~ 
l am 
i 
= 
~ 
i ` 


en 
a 
a 


i 
Sivas 
4 


62 


Fantastic Technology 


Cost: 150, 25 (fuel) 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: 

Repulsorlift Engine: Can operate up to one hour before power packs 
must be replaced. Has a flight ceiling of 35 meters and a Move of 18. 
Rocket Jets: Holds enough fuel for five blasts, which can move the 
wearer up to 35 meters vertically or 50 meters horizontally. 
Design: Mike Kogge (honorable mention) 


m VIEW MASKER 


If you worry about people violating your privacy, con- 
sider purchasing the zZip PSG-8487 View Masker. With 
voice code activation, it creates a localized visual distortion 
field (1 meter in diameter) which makes visual or audio 
scans virtually impossible. To the outside viewer, waves of 
color and “visual static" makes it difficult to determine what 
is happening inside the field. 

Model: zZip Product Concepts PSG-8487 View Masker 
Type: Portable distortion field 

Cost: 2,500, 50 (power cells), 100 (sensor alarm module) 
Availability: 3,F,R or X 


Fantastic Technology 


GALIADINIUM B 


m VOICE SCRAMBLER 


Some things were never meant to be heard. When a 
private conversation needs to stay that way, try the latest in 
voice scrambling technology from Ulkop Securities. Clev- 
erly disguised as an ornamental piece of jewelry, the Ulkop 
voice scrambler blocks reception by local surveillance 
devices by locally blanketing the wearer with a low-fre- 
quency distortion field. Normal voice patterns are modu- 
lated and broken up as they pass through different distor- 
tion layers so that the conversation is unrecognizable at a 
range of more than three meters. While the use of such 
ornamentation does not prohibit normal speech within 
close proximity, it nevertheless provides an added blanket 
of protection. 

Model: Ulkop Securities SVC-700 Voice Scrambler 

Type: Voice scrambler 

Cost: 600 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: The voice scrambler distorts conversation so that 
more than three meters away it is impossible to determine the 
content of the conversation. 


63 


~ J| GALL AMINIUM 


TRAVEL ADS 


extensive Falkenharn product line is their Mark V14 bag- 
gage handler. Built of lightweight, composite plastics with 
long-term use rechargeable power cells, this collapsible 
repulsor carrier can support up to 500 kilograms to an 
adjustable height of 1.8 meters above surface level. Built-in 
inertia dampeners allow for seemingly near-frictionless 
motion that can be guided manually or with the aid of a 
palm-sized infrared controller. 
Once your goods have been safely secured at their 
Mark V14 conveniently folds down to re- 
and can be easily reassembled in min- 


Our galactic community is a mobile society. Interstel- 
lar travel is commonplace for the average Imperial citi- 
zen. But with such increased mobility there often comes 
acorresponding increase in frustration and confusion as 
cultures and customs clash. While travel mishaps are 
rare, they do happen and care must be taken to allow for 
such an unlikely event. 

Forthesereasons, Galladinium has compiled a collec- 
tion of travel aids to assist the interplanetary passenger 


tion and aggravation. Each item i 
with a specific travel need. Look 


better. 


m REPULSORLIFT BAG 
Mardig knew his was th 
for another week. Miss this 


and locked into place, the carrier 
rs wide, and 65 centimeters tall. 
ed and can be folded back for 
emovable) and lift control studs 


in his resignation before b 
crowded terminal, he reflected that 
him when hetold them the depart 
up without warning. With his re 


the security scan point. No! Don 1 clós thé 
four minutes to lift-off! With a final curse against whatever 
galactic fates ruled the mystical process of scheduling 
orbital shuttles, Mardig threw his remaining bag, and then 
himself, onto the carrier. 

With a shrill “Gang way!” echoing behind him, Mardig 
flew past the astonished security guards, gliding to a stop 
scant millimeters from the portal hatchway. Whatever she 
might have thought of Mardig’s arrival, the Tri-Planetary 
Atmospheric attendant was professional enough to keep 
such comments to herself. 

“Will that be oxygen or alternate cabin atmosphere, sir?" 

Dismounting from his trusty carrier, Mardig nonchalantly 
removed a spec of lint from his tunic before handing over 
his boarding disk. 

"Oxygen, if you please ..." 


For over half a century, Falkenharn Repulsors has been 
the leader in producing quality repulsorlift cargo handlers 
for business and personal needs. Whatever you have to 
move, Falkenharn helps you get it there with a minimum of 
exertion. 

One of the more commonly sought after items in the 


64 


te) ‘att Ss still - 


Th niniaturized repulsor inducers and 
located along bottom surface layers and 
ve grill. When fully charged, this carrier 
t capability for 100 standard hours. 

ceis adjustable uP to 1.8 meters. An optional 


am DISTRESS BEACON 


When the unfortunate happens, help will be quickly on 
the way if you use the dependable Saladar Systems emer- 
gency distress beacon. Operating with two long-life micro- 
power cells with a shelf life of over 10 standard years, the 


lilustrations by Matt Busch and Robert Duchlinski 


Fantastic Technology 


i ALI. ADINIUM 


Saladar PED-21 portable beacon transmits personal tran- 
sponder codes along all major subspace frequencies at a 
range of up to five light-years. 


Model: Saladar Systems PED-21 Distress Beacon 

Type: Portable emergency distress beacon 

Cost: 200 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Normal operation is automatic upon activation. À 
Moderate communications roll is required, however, should the 
user attempt to calibrate the device for non-standard bandwidths, 
such as Imperial military, government-restricted or Alliance fre- 
quencies. 


E EMERGENCY INFLATION SHELTER 


No one likes to think about possible disaster before 
setting out on an important journey. There is no reason, 
however, why one cannot be 
prepared for the conse- 
quences of unforseen 
mishaps along the 
way. At Valerenn 
Environmentals, 
preparedness is our 
business. Topping 
the line of 
Valerenn survival 
equipment is the 
personal shelter 
capsule (PSC), an 
inflatable, self-con- 
tained, environmental 
protection shelter capable 
of housing a humanoid up to 2.25 meters in length. Once 
activated, the PSC automatically inflates into a hemispheri- 
cal shelter with a fully oxygenated and temperature-con- 
trolled environment. When the only thing you have stand- 
ing between you and the elements comes from Valerenn 
Environmentals, you can rest assured you've been well 
provided for. 

Model: Valerenn Environmentals Personal Shelter Capsule 

Type: Personal environmental protection shelter 

Skill: Survival 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Prior to activation, the PSC is a flat, 1 meter square, 25 
centimeter thick cube that houses an inflatable, highly reflective 
fabric shelter. Filaments running throughout the fabric draw solar 
energy to the shelter's batteries, allowing for up to 10 hours of 
continuous use. When fully inflated, the shelter expands to a 


Fantastic Technology 


diameter of 2.5 meters and oxygen recycling and heating elements 
are automatically activated. A zippered entraceway gives access to 
the interior. A Very Easy survival roll is required for activation. 


im ENERGY CAPACITOR 


This deviceis used to obtain energy from energy sources 
which can then be transferred to other devices. This device 
appears as a meter long tube with a number of 
collector plates at one end. 

Thecapacitor's appropriate collector plate 
is attached to the energy interface for what- 
ever device is providing the energy. The 
capacitor then collects energy into long- 
term high-capacity storage sources 
(maximum capacity is enough to 
power one personal landspeeder 
for three hours of constant opera- 
tion; equivalent to power one 
blaster pistol for 100 shots or 
one personal comlink for 15 
hours). 

After the capacitor has 
collected the energy, it 
can then be attached 
to any device which 
is low on energy, 
powering it until the 
capacitor is drained 
of power. 

Model: Dardrennis Survival Technology EMS-500 

Type: Energy collection system 

Skill: Survival 

Cost: 1,500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: An Easy Technical roll is required for normal opera- 
tion. The difficulty level may vary depending upon the type and 
amount of energy flow being accessed. Energy collection rates will 
vary from anywhere for an hour (from a large power source or 
generator) up to six days (such as from low power blaster power 
packs) for a full charge. 


m FOOD ANALYZER 


Ever been away from home and your host offers you a 
delicacy of questionable origin? What to do when you've 
been invited to dine at that posh restaurant uptown only to 
find that the delightful culinary experience you ordered is 
slowly slithering off your plate? Ever been unexpectedly 
caught ina wilderness zone with no way of knowing whether 
those nearby berries are tasty — or even 
safe — to eat? 

With the latest advance from 
SuriTech Foodstuffs you need never 
be concerned about offending 
your host (or your digestive sys- 
tem)again. With aSuriTech food 
analyzer, food or drink can be 
quickly and easily examined. 
Simply place a small sample into 
the convenient receptacle and 
theanalyzer's sensors will run a full read- 
ing on the item and compare it to your 
pre-loaded facts about your digestive 
needs and concerns. Within seconds a 
readout tells you whether or not it's safe 
to indulge. 

TheSuriTech food analyzer base model 
comes fully programmed to identify over 


65 


LABINILIM 


psa. 


5,000 food and drink selections covering a wide selection of 
galactic cuisines. Additional data chips can be added to 
accommodate specific planetary environments or culinary 
tastes. 

Model: SuriTech Foodstuffs Ez} Analyzer 

Type: Personal food analyzer 

Cost: 250, 50 (additional data chips), 100 (customized datachips) 
Availability: 2 

Game Notes: A Very Easy survival roll is required for normal 
operation. The user will typically purchase additional data chips 
(up to a maximum of 5 can be added at any time) which provide 
information on additional entrees. Persons suffering from reac- 
tions to specific foods or food additives may purchase customized 
datachips designed to examine for specific components and warn 
against possible allergic reactions. 


m GALACTIC CURRENCY CONVERTER 


With Bank of the Core's (BOC's) newest addition to their 
personal financial management product line, never again 
will you have to fumble for credit chips of varying local 
currencies or wonder if the conveyor pilot is making a little 
extra at your expense. This pocket-sized currency conver- 
sion computer can tell you in seconds exactly how much is 
owed at the current rate of exchange. Interface adaptor 
clips allow for easy tie-intothe BOC customer computer net 
at any one of thousands of BOC offices to upload exchange 
rate data at no extra charge. With reinforced shielded alloy 
construction, this device is built to resist severe radiation 
storms and savage baggage handlers and anything else 
between those two extremes. 


Model: Bank of the Core GCC-1000 

Type: Currency converter 

Skill: Business 

Cost: 300, 50 (additional sector modules) 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Base unit handles data for all major Core, Inner Rim 
and Colonies sectors. Additional program modules for additional 
sectors also available. An Easy business roll is required for normal 
operation. 


E GIVIN EMERGENCY VACUUM SEAL 


One of the most dangerous threats of space flight is an 
unexpected hull breach. In such a crisis situation the need 
for a quick way to seal a starship's interior compartments is 
of critical importance. In searching for a solution to this 
potentially life-threatening situation, Galladinium turned to 


66 


the Givin, a species that thrives in a near-vacuum environ- 
ment. 

Givin scientists have produced a bio-mechanical device 
that is both portable and fast-acting. In appearance, the 
Givin Emergency Vacuum Seal (EVS) is a circular disk with 
control pad and placement handles on one side. In a crisis 
situation, the circular seal is slapped against the hull's 
interior wherever a breach has occurred. 

When activated, micro-molecular grip-locks keep the 
seal in place. Next, a mild electrical current stimulates a 
layer of Givin micro-organisms that line the outside of the 
EVS. Oncestimulated, these organisms, which normally live 
in a vacuum, begin to multiply. Within seconds they form a 
biological seal around the breach point, creating a tempo- 
rary but extremely durable seal. 

Once the breach has been contained, a neutralizing 
current is applied to prevent uncontrolled growth. 

Model: Galvronos Givin Interchanges, Limited EVS BBS-909 
Type: Emergency vacuum seal 

Cost: 750 (up to 50 centimeters in diameter); 1,000 (51-100 centime- 
ters in diameter) 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Normal application requires a Moderate Strength total 
(to fight the pull of the atmosphere rushing out into space) and a 
Moderate Dexterity total (to reach and hit the controls while the 
character is fighting not to get pulled out into space). Seals come in 
different sizes ranging from 10 centimeters to 1 meter in diameter. 


im HEAT INDUCTION STAFF 


In an emergency situation, especially on an arctic world 
or one where atmospheric conditions tend to be on the thin 
side, the gravest danger can be numbing cold. The heat 
induction staff is a by-product of Rodian weapon technol- 
ogy turned to other uses. This meter-long staff uses a 
multiple array of low-intensity heating lasers to excite the 
molecules of any material the point of the staff touches. 
While the outer surface of the target remains intact (except 
in the most energy-rich substances, such as 
petroleum products), internally excited at- 
oms generate heat over several hours. 
The staff's power cells can last up 
to 40 hours of continuous use 
before requiring recharg- 
ing. 

Model: Salasetti Sur- 
vivalSystems, Incor- 
porated Heat Induc- 
tion Staff 

Type: Emergency 
heat generator 
Skill: Survival 

Cost: 300 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: An Easy survival roll is required for normal operation. 
Accidental contact with the heating point results in 3D damage. 


Fantastic Technology 


m NAVIGATION/DIRECTION FINDER 


You'll never get lost if you havethe most recent addition 
to the Celextrian line of personal outdoor survival technol- 
ogy. This handy device triangulates communications trans- 
missions from orbital satellites to pinpoint your location to 
within 20 meters. Inclement weather does not hamper this 
device and in most cases triangulation can be performed at 
anytime of day or night (provided the planet uses a network 
of satellites equipped with standard location protocal sig- 
nals). 

With a surface area map pre-programmed into the navi- 
gation/direction finder (NavDif), finding your way home will 
be as simple as looking up at the stars. 

Model: Celextrian SNDF-12 

Type: Satellite Navigation/Direction Finder 
Skill: Survival 

Cost: 850 

Availability: 2 


| L 1L 


UA HHESHIOIEEEHEETEPEEHREEEEER HR 


Game Notes: Àn Easy survival roll is necessary for normal opera- 
tion. In lieu of standard orbital satellite relay networks, coordi- 
nated broadcast signals may be received from local broadcast 
networks by adjusting reception band width (a Moderate survival 
roll). 


m PORTABLE MESSAGE TRANSCEIVER 


Now you can always stay in touch with those important 
people. Using recent advances in communication frequency 
technologies, Cirenian Communications can now offer ex- 
panded communications capabilities at your fingertips. 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI. 


CC's latest offering uses modulated broadcast relays to 
dramatically extend broadcast and reception range. With 
this enhanced communications application, transmissions 
are receivable by host comm stations at distances over 
2,000 kilometers by "piggy-backing" them along traditional 
mass media communication signals. 

The result is performance previously available only with 
vehicle sized units ... now in the palm of your hand. 

The manufacturer advises customers to check local 
conditions to insure that this service is available from an 
authorized Cirenian Communications liscensee or franchise. 
Model: Cirenian Communications Model SW-95 
Type: Extended Range Message Transceiver 
Skill: Communications 
Cost: 400 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Maximum range dependent on local conditions: 
inadequate communications outlets in outlying areas or extreme 
weather conditions can greatly hamper or eliminate communica- 
tions capability. 


m WATER PURIFIER 


Wherever you are, you'll soon have safe drinking water 
if you've brought along your WPR-60 water purifier by 
Pretormin Environmental. Simply fill the external holding 
canister with water and let the WPR's cleansing action do 
the rest. Microbiological filtering agents, heating and radia- 
tion elements eliminate over 99% of known harmful bacte- 
ria, viruses or contaminants. Theresult is water suitable for 
cooking or drinking. Useit over and over: it's solar recharge- 
able, so there's never any worry about power cells running 
low! 


Model: Pretormin Environmental WPR-60 

Type: Water purification system 

Skill: Survival 

Cost: 100 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: A Very Easy survival roll is required for normal use. 
The amount of time required to properly filtrate water samples is 
dependant on local sources. Average filtration time is 5 minutes. 
The unit will notify the user when cleansing process is completed. 


67 


Kad GALIADINIUM 341.1. ABINIUT 


WEAPONS AND 
SELF-DEFENSE 


“Hokey religions and ancient weapons are no substitute 
for a good blaster at your side. ” 


— Famous Corellian Smuggler 


Need we say more? 

Its a dangerous galaxy — one where hostile aliens, 
pirates, Rebel terrorists or any number of other groups 
can bring your day-to-day routine to a deadly halt. 

For those times when you find yourself in the wrong 
place at the wrong time, the following self-defense hard- 
ware is offered. Protect yourself and those you care 
about. 


MELEE WEAPONS: UNPOWERED 
m CONCUSSION STICK 


When the local civil authorities are displeased by open 
displays of personal weaponry it’s time to consider carrying 
a pair of concussion sticks. Easily disguised as small, cylin- 
drical data probes or similar hardware, concussion sticks 
are hand-held, hand-activated packets of explosive fire- 
power. 


Concussion sticks work by keeping two chemical ele- 
ments separate. Striking a concussion stick against a solid 
object mixes the two agents. Within seconds, the concus- 
sion stick heats rapidly — a tell-tale sign of imminent 
detonation. About 15 seconds after activation, the concus- 
sion stick will discharge, generating a stunning concussion 
blast several meters in diameter. Inert (until activated) and 


totally unnoticed by all but the most sophisticated probes, 
the concussion stick offers maximum stopping power when 
it's needed. 

Model: Sessian Armaments Concussion Stick Model 1-79 

Type: Chemical explosive weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat (for melee attacks), thrown weapons (for 
throwing attacks) 

Cost: 200 per pair 

Availability: 3, F, Ror X 

Blast Raidus: 0-1/2/4 

Damage: 5D/4D/2D (stun) 

Game Notes: Concussion stick detonates 15 seconds after activa- 
tion. 


MELEE WEAPONS: POWERED 
m FEAR STICK 


To all appearances a normal writing stylus, the fear stick 
isin actuality a potent close-range self-defense weapon. The 
cartridges used by this device contain a special fast-acting 
neural-toxin which is injected into the target's central ner- 
vous system. This neural-toxin reacts with the specific 
portion of the victim's cerebral center governing emotional 
control, specifically fear and flight responses. 

Emphasizing the non-lethal nature of this device, an 
effective application results in the attacker fleeing the scene, 
allowing the user to go about one’s business without further 
harassment. This device is ideal for situations where local 
ordinances would otherwise prohibit more overt personal 
protection. Its non-metallic construction and a lack of any 
discernible power source make it readily concealable. 


Illustrations by David Deitrick, Robert Duchlinski, Brian Schomburg and Christina Wald 


68 


Fantastic Technology 


Model: Sabrashi Bio-Chemical Deterrents, Inc., FSI-200 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee weapon: knife 

Ammo: 2 

Cost: 600, 50 (refills) 

Availability: 4, F 

Difficulty: Moderate 

Damage: 2D stun damage (due to system shock) 

Game Notes: One round after injection, the recipient must make a 
Difficult stamina orwillpower roll to avoid the onset of a severe 
panic attack resulting in immediate flight. This emotional state will 
continue until a Heroic stamina orwillpowerrollis made or one hour 
has elapsed. 


m JENGARDIN DOUBLE-BLADED VIBROBLADE 

sometimes just letting the other person know you have 
a particular weapon is enough to avoid having to make use 
of it. This is the rationale behind this authorized version of 
thefamed double-bladed weapon of the Jengardin Millennial 
Warriors. Available for the first time to the general public, 
this weapon is truly an ominous sight to behold. Even 
sheathed and unpowered, its unique appearance will often 
stop an altercation in the making before it happens. 


Model: Yalandross PowerMasters Jengardin Millennial Warrior 
Double-Bladed Vibroblade 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee weapon: vibroblade 

Cost: 6,000, 25 (power cells), 75 (front left-side holster sheath with 
waist and shoulder straps) 

Availability: 4, F, Ror X 

Difficulty: Difficult 

Damage: STR+4D+1 (Maximum 8D) 

Game Notes: This is a two-handed weapon and requires the user's 
full concentration. Any attempt to use this weapon single-handedly 
increases the difficulty by two levels. Any attempt to do anything 
other than attack (melee combat) or defend (melee parry) with the 
weapon increases the difficulty of all actions by two levels (in 
addition to the one-handed penalty). If any attack roll while using 
the weapon misses by 10 or more points, the user inflicts damage 
on him or herself. 


æ MOLECULAR STILETTO 
When is a weapon not a weapon? When it looks like a 
datapad stylus! 


GAILADINIUM Bi 


The molecular stiletto from Xana Exotic Arms looks like 
a standard stylus ... until you activate a control stud along 
the tip of the stylus and release a 30 centimeter long mono- 
molecular blade as sharp as a vibroblade. Nimble and 
deadly in a close quarters situation, this stiletto is a particu- 
larly nasty surprised for anyone seeking to take advantage 
of an “unarmed” victim. 
Model: Xana Exotic Arms MSW-9 Molecular Stiletto 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 400 
Availability: 4, R or X 
Difficulty: Moderate 
Damage: STR+2D 


m POWER CANE 


Locara had courage, you had to give her that. There were 
few people who would willingly march into Boss Gew'lek's 
office unannounced, sit themselves down, and start de- 
manding that the boss fork over some hefty credits for a 
recent hit. But that's just what she did. 

Marching in like she owned the place, Locara sat herself 
down in the boss's best chair, her hands resting on that 
fancy cane of hers, and looked the Boss dead in the eye to 
demand money! 

“I understand you were the one who ordered the hit on 
the Cavalier Club tonight. You owe me 50,000 credits for 
that little indiscretion." 

"You've got to be joking. Just who do you think you are 
barging in here at this time of night?" 

Slam! Down went her cane, ringing loudly against the 
parqueted wood floor. 

"On second thought, make that 60,000 credits. My time is 
valuable, don't you know?" 

“You've got alot to learn about respectin' other people's 
privacy, Locara." 

Slam! Down went the cane a second time, and now a 
strange light seemed to enter Locara's eyes. From where | 
was standing, it looked almost like anticipation. 

“Throw another 10,000 into the pot for my cleanup 
costs." 


“This was humorous for a moment or two, but I have 
business. Boys, show the ‘lady’ the way out.” 

Slam! Down went that irritating cane a third time. And a 
fourth, and a fifth! Having gotten everybody's attention, 
Locara removed her hands from the cane's top. Suddenly 
we could all see the ruby-red glow of a power point on 
maximum load. With thetip now resting a couple of millime- 


Fantastic Technology 


69 


- lj GALLADINIUM & 


ters from his face, the Boss was in an especially good 
position to see it as well. No one moved. 
"That was 70,000, wasn't it?" 


Never let it be said that one cannot provide for personal 
defense while making a fashion statement at the same time. 
This is the idea behind Palandrix's power cane. Constructed 
of the finest spun plastoids and layered with an attractive 
hardwood outer coating, the Palandrix power cane is 90 
centimeters of beauty and protection in a single package. 
The power cane has a 30-centimeter long stiletto blade 
housedina concealed, spring-activated compartment along 
the lower half of the cane. The ornamental gemstone-like 
top is a disguised power point capable of providing a nasty 
shock when one needs to make a point. Activation of the 
central power source is accomplished by a sharp tapping 
on the cane's control stud, located at the base of the shaft. 
Subsequent tappings increase the discharge level — the 
cane has five different settings. Subtle, yet very sophisti- 
cated, this designer original goes with just about any en- 
semble and allows confidence and security no matter where 
the evening may lead to. 

Model: Palandrix Personal Protection Gear Power Cane 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat: power cane 

Cost: 400 

Availability: 3, F, R or X 

Difficulty: Easy (stiletto blade), Moderate (power point) 
Damage: 1D-5D (variable settings; not based on Strength), STR+1D 
(stiletto) 


m RODIAN CRYOGEN WHIP 


Never ones to let good technology be wasted on “mere” 
non-military applications, the Rodians have adapted cryo- 
genic technology to produce the Rodian cryogen whip. The 
weapon appears to be a simple coiled whip with an outer 
coating of flexible metal panels. The core of the whip 
circulates super-cooled chemicals that chill the outer pan- 
els. As the tip of the lash strikes an object, the extreme cold 
of the metal panels causes a near-explosive chemical reac- 
tion, which generates a stunning blast and a loud crack. 


Model: Sancretti Arms & Munitions, Interstellar Rodian Cyrogen 
Whip 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat 

Cost: 350 

Availablity: 3, F, R or X 

Difficulty: Moderate 


Damage: STR+1D (whip), plus 4D (stun damage due to extreme 
cold). Victim must also make a Moderate stamina roll after second 
and additional strikes to avoid a -1D penalty to Dexterity and all 
related skills due to system shock (penalties are cumulative). 


m TOGORIAN SCIMITAR 


Individually-forged Togorian scimitars have long com- 
manded a substantial price on the galactic market. Each 
scimitar is a custom work of art crafted by a Togorian tribal 
hunter. Each tribe’s scimitars have unique design elements 
and the hunter will then add his or her own personal 
touches in any number of ways. While some scimitars are 
powered in the same way as most vibro-weapons, most 
Togorian scimitars are “simple” muscle-powered weapons. 

Galladinium has contracted the famed Yil clan for the 
special scimitars offered below. This specific Togorian 
scimitar uses neither a metallic blade nor a vibroblade. 
Instead, the scimitar’s meter-long blade is actually a crystal- 
line substance; the latticed structure is an extremely pow- 
erful conductor of electrical energy. It is both a work of art 
and a tool from a proud hunter society. 


Model: Togorian Yil Tribe Scimitar 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat: Togorian Scimitar 

Cost: 8,500 

Availability: 4, F or R 

Difficulty: Moderate 

Damage: STR+2D 

Game Notes: In addition to normal damage, the scimitar inflicts 4D 
stun damage from electrical shock. 


RANGED W/EAPONS: BLASTER 
SPORTING BLASTERS 


m LUXAN PENETRATOR 


At first glance, this tiny blaster might not seem to be all 
that much of a threat, but you'll never hear that from 
someone who's seen it in action. The Penetrator uses a 
series of precision galven circuits to focus a standard 
blaster beam into a highly concentrated beam with greater 
blast power. The net effect is a hand weapon that packs a 
punch far out of proportion to its physical dimensions. 
Model: Luxan Personal Armaments, Ltd. Penetrator MB-450 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: sporting blaster 
Ammo: 100 


PME DUDEN .ANGGLUULq IÁibPHPÓU|-ULÉP? ÉUV'UVWIOUL,L,-LLLLILALXEISIINEIIUIEIZIHEIZIZCECETEIEEIEIESCCEEEEZIEETÉ ET SPELTIILTCTIEICECLLETLEEETTITIIIIÉIZTILEBEICEIIIEEEÍPELIZIZZZIITP LELETLEIZEIÍILII1IDÍIÉZETEIEELL:DÍLLLELLÉLL£L/MSEUS 


70 


Fantastic Technology 


Cost: 600, 50 (power cell) 

Availability: 4, F or R 

Body: 1D 

Fire Rate: 1 

Range: 5-20/40/60 

Damage: 5D 

Game Notes: Increase normal blaster difficulties by one level due to 
the precise targeting needed to hit (due to the focused beam). 


BLASTER PISOLS 


m INTIMIDATOR 


You'd be intimidated too if one of these were pointed in 
your direction. À departure from traditional blaster de- 
signs, the IR-5 sacrifices overall stopping power for rapid 
fire. Using a specially designed actuating blaster module 
and blast containment and recoil suppression elements, 
the IR-5 is capable of both full and semi-automatic firing. 


Model: Merr-Sonn Munitions "Intimidator" IR-5 

Type: Rapid-fire blaster pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: blaster pistol 

Ammo: 50 

Cost: 1,250, 25 (power pack), 200 (retractable stock) 
Availability: 3, X 

Fire Control: 2D 

Range: 3-7/25/50 

Damage: 3D 

Game Notes: Fire control bonus applies only to multiple shots in 
the same round on different targets within a 90 degree field of fire; 
a single shot or shots at the same target grant no bonus. Addition 
of retractable stock gives adds «1D to blaster roll when aiming for 
one round. 


Fantastic Technology 


GALILADINIUM B 


BLASTER CARBINES 


i BI-POLAR BLASTER CARBINE 


SoroSuub’s dual-barreled blaster carbine can be fired 
separately for normal fire or it can be fired simultaneously 
for a nasty surprise for the recipient of the blast. 

Thetwo blaster barrels generate opposite polarity blaster 
bolts. The bolts diverge slightly in flight. When the two bolts 
strike the same target, a connection is created between the 
two bolts — the energy of the reversed polarity bolts 
creates a blast of incredible power! 


Model: SoroSuub Bi-polar Blaster BMC-150 

Type: Dual blaster carbine 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: blaster carbine 

Ammo: 50 

Cost: 1,000, 100 (power pack) 

Availability: 4, R or X 

Fire Rate: 1 

Range: 25-100/200/300 

Damage: 4D (single shot), 6D (simultaneous bolts) 
Game Notes: Use of bi-pod adds «1D to blaster roll. 
Additional Design: Ron Seiden 


REPEATING BLASTERS 


m BI/A15 PICKET GUN 


A simple automated auto-blaster, the picket gun helps 
bases short on personnel maintain a relatively secure pe- 
rimeter. The auto-blaster is a stationary mount with a 
limited intelligence droid brain; itis programmed to search 
out moving targets. When a target is detected, it uses its 
visual and audio comlink to broadcast its data to an ap- 
pointed command center; upon being granted approval, the 
auto-blaster will open fire on a given target. 


71 


~ J| SALLANINIUM 


Its sensor package can handle the visual, infrared and 
ultraviolet spectrums and is programmed with an integral 
motion detector and multiple target acquisition system. It 
can rotate 360 degrees for a full field of fire. 

The picket gun can be programmed to automatically fire 
on any target not equipped with a specific broadcast iden- 
tification badge. 

The major problem with the unit is that the sensor array 
is left-mounted and the sensors themselves cover only a 45 
degree arc; the unit rotates to get a full field of vision. People 
who move quickly and to the right side ofthe blaster may be 
able to move past the unit without being detected. 

Model: Atgar BI/al5 Picket Gun 

Type: Automated auto-blaster 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 5,000 

Availability: 2, R 

Body: 2D 

Fire Rate: 5 

Range: 3-50/75/100 

Damage: 6D 

Game Notes: Has blaster 5D, search 5D. Comlink has a range of five 
kilometers. 

Design: Scot Eddy (honorable mention) 


RANGED WEAPONS: MISSILE 
WEAPONS, FIREARMS AND 
SPECIALTY WEAPONS 


MISSILE WEAPONS 


m FLECHETTE SMART PISTOL 


Noting the success of recent shoulder-fired flechette 
weapons, Malaxan Firepower has produced a hand-held 
flechette pistol that combines superior sensor tracking 
with lightweight lethality. The heart of the FWG-5 system is 
a miniaturized laser tracker that electronically "paints" a 
target with a homing signature when the contact stud is 
depressed. Each flechette cartridge has miniaturized sen- 
sorsontheouter shell and carries scores of flechette micro- 
darts (each approximately 1.5 millimeters long). As the 
flechette cartridge is discharged, the sensor elements de- 
tect the laser signature and home-in on the target. Prior to 
impact, the cartridge ruptures, unleashing the micro-darts. 


Model: Malaxan Firepower Incorporated FWG-5 
Type: Flechette pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Ammo: 8 shots per clip 

Cost: 500, 30 (ammunition clip) 


72 


Availability: 3, F or R 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 10-20/50/100 

Damage: 3D (point-blank range)/5D (short range)/4D (medium 
range)/3D (long range) 

Game Notes: Damage depends on range. 


m PROJECTILE HUNTING RIFLE 


Sure, you look at a big, lazy Dalef razorback lying around 
in the Imperial zoo and you think to yourself, “Gee, it's just 
an overgrown house pet." You wouldn't think that if you 
were out in the bush trying to tranq one and the creature 
took a notion to charge you. It’s not the easiest thing to hold 
a weapon lock while 200 kilograms of muscle and fangs are 
bearing down on you at full speed. That just goes to show 
that it’s not the weapon that makes the hunter; it's the 
person using the right weapon. 

The HB-4 projectile hunting rifle uses a special wire- 
guided sensor system that assists the user in making a 
clean, one-shot attack. As the projectile is fired from the HB- 
4, a mono-filament trace-wire trails out. The HB-4 feeds 
flight adjustment information to the mini-missile. The trick 
is to maintain a steady hand, keeping direct line-of-sight on 
the quarry until impact. Not everyone is skilled enough to 
usethis superior long-range targeting system, but then only 
the most discriminating shop Galladinium! 


Model: Prax Arms HB-4 Projectile Rifle 

Type: Long-range hunting weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Ammo: 6 (with individual wire-guided relays) 

Cost: 1,500, 150 (ammo) 

Availability: 4, F or R 

Fire Rate: | 

Fire Control: 1D+1 (at ranges of 1 kilometer or more) 

Range: 50-1/4/8 km 

Damage: 5D 

Game Notes: In order for fire control bonus, user must maintain 
line-of-sight contact with the target for the duration of projectile’s 
flight (moves at 1 kilometer per round). Inside this minimum range 
there is no benefit from fire control. The wire-guide cut-off on the 
HB-4 releases shells. 


m PRAX PROTECTOR 


For the ultimate in concealed personal preservation, try 
the Prax Arms Protector. This palm-sized personal defense 
weapon uses no energy emitters or power cells that can be 
detected by sophisticated scanningequipment. The weapon 
itself is easily broken up into four individual components, 
each of which can be quickly and neatly disassembled to 
further disguise their function, yet the weapon can be 
reassembled at a moment's notice. The weapon has a 
spring-powered launcher that fires a 3-centimeter dart. 
Each hollow dart contains a mixture of volatile gases that 
react violently upon exposure to the atmosphere (in other 
words, upon impact). 


Fantastic Technology 


Model: Prax Arms Protector PRP-500 Hold-Out Dart Pistol 
Type: Anti-personnel weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapon: dart shooter 

Ammo: 6 rounds per clip 

Cost: 250, 40 (ammo clip) 

Availability: 2, F or R 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 1-5/15/25 

Damage: 1D (impact), 3D-5D (chemical explosion, depending upon 
mixture) 

Game Notes: Ineffective in non-oxygenated atmospheres. 


FIREARMS 


m ADJUDICATOR 


The Adjudicator is one of the few non-energy hold-out 
weapons commercially available in large quantities. Its 
small ammunition capacity is more than compensated for 
by the weapon's small size (for ease of concealment) and 
stopping power. A mechanical spring-activated wrist clamp 
allows for quick access in an emergency. For those times 
when you need a big punch in a small package, the Adjudi- 
cator will “even things out” a bit. 


Model: Czerka Adjudicator 

Type: Slug throwing hold-out pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Ammo: 4 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 1-5/10/25 

Damage: 3D+1 

Cost: 300, 50 (wrist clamp magnetic holstering lock), 10 (ammo) 
Availability: 2, F or R 

Game Notes: If optional spring-clamp is employed, user gains +1D 


GAILADINIUM Bi 


to the character's firearms skill to quickdraw against an opponent 
(for quickdraw rules, see the Han Solo and the Corporate Sector 
Sourcebook, page 122). 


m BLASTER BUSTER 


As personal defense items go, the Blaster Buster from 
Oriolanis is nothing if not unorthodox in its application. 
Where other weapons are designed with stopping the at- 
tacker in mind, this palm-sized pistol is specifically de- 
signed to go after the attacker’s weapon instead. 

A combination telescopic, laser-guided targeting sight 
with heat-seeking ammunition means the Buster will do its 
job of disabling most hand blaster weapons. The Buster is 
activated by the pressure of a firm grip on the weapon. The 
sighting unit is used to “paint” the attacker’s weapon witha 
laser signature which targets the particles of ionized gas 
that escape from a blaster muzzle when it discharges. This 
signature is a trail for the Buster’s very special ammunition: 
projectiles that home-in on the laser signature. The user 
need not be accomplished in marksmanship. Once fired in 
the owner’s general direction, the projectile locks onto the 
laser and finds its target. The result is a ruined blaster and 
a very surprised assailant. 


Model: Oriolanis Defense Systems Blaster Buster 

Type: Anti-energy weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Ammo: 4 

Cost: 350, 30 (ammo clip) 

Availability: 2, F or R 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 0-3/10/20 

Damage: 3D 

Game Notes: The user must make a firearms roll to successfully 
target the blaster weapon. Once targeted, as long as the blaster is 
in the same general area and is still in line of sight, the projectile will 
home in on the weapon. Damage is rolled against the blaster's body 
(normally 1D-2D). Laser targeting disperses after 10 seconds. 


m BLISTER BLASTER 


Something of a lethal misnomer — the blister blaster is 
not a blaster at all, although in size and shape it resembles 
one. It is a high velocity slug thrower that shoots hollow 
rounds that contain a volatile petro-chemical reactant. 
When exposed to oxygen (on impact), the mixture spreads 
over a 10 centimeter area and immediately ignites. In addi- 
tion to damage from kinetic impact, the target is also 
subjected to burning damage. 

Model: Golon Arms Blister Blaster 
Type: Slug thrower 


—eeeeeeeee eee 


Fantastic Technology 


73 


«JJ GALLADINIUM 


Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Ammo: 8 

Cost: 300 

Availability: 3, F or R 

Fire Rate: 3 

Range: 5-20/40/60 

Damage: 4D, 3D second round (due to burns), 2D in third round, 
continuing for 1D rounds (due to burns). 


m IONIC TINGLER 


Easily disguised as a small currency pouch or similar 
container, the Aeramaxis PDW-50 Ionic Tingler offers a rude 
awakening for would-be assailants. With a range extending 
out to 10 meters and a standard clip of five soft-shell 
cartridges, this lightweight personal defense weapon offers 
maximum knock-down power without the jarring recoil 
associated with bulkier hand weapons. 


A five round horizontal clip is attached to the base of the 
tingler. When attached, ionic pulse regulators within the 
unit begin to energize plasma particles in each of the shells. 
Full charge normally occurs within 10 minutes, although a 
partial charge on each cartridge can be obtained in as little 
as two minutes. Once fully charged, the tingler's pulse 
regulators keep the shells energized at maximum strength 
for as long as the unit's power cell lasts. 

Upon striking its intended target, the tingler shell's cov- 
ering disintegrates, allowing the charged plasma particles 
insideto comein contact with the surrounding atmosphere. 
The result is a near-instantaneous localized blast effect. 
Damage is distributed evenly along the target's surface 


74 


area, often leading to a severe shock to the assailant's 
central nervous system (hence the name “tingler”). A favor- 
ite of civilian couriers throughout the Core! 

Model: Aeramaxis PDW-50 Ionic Tingler 

Type: Charged firearm 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Ammo: 5 

Cost: 300, 25 (power pack), 20 (ammo clip) 

Availability: 3, often F or R (may be illegal in some systems) 

Fire Rate: ! 

Range: 0-3/6/10 

Damage: 2D (projectile), 1-5D stun damage (depending on amount 
of charge) 

Game Notes: The tingler has a hollow cavity for the insertion of the 
special five-round clip. 


m KELVARLEK DISSUADER 


Another non-energy weapon, but one that packs a par- 
ticularly nasty bite to it. The Kelvarlek Dissuader forgoes 
theuse of traditional solid rounds in favor of metal-jacketed 
cartridges filled with borless acid. The recipient not only 
takes damage from shot, but the acid's effects continue to 
dissuade the would-be attacker from further interest in you 
and yours. À built-in laser guided sighting mechanism makes 
this a small but very respectable piece of hardware to have 
in a bad situation. 


Model: Kelvarek Consolidated Arms Dissuader KD-30 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Ammo: 6 

Cost: 400, 30 (ammunition clip) 

Availability: 3, F 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 50/75/100 

Damage: 3D; 3D acid burn damage for three rounds unless charac- 
ter has hardened materials which resist acids. 

Game Notes: Internal laser sighting system automatically adds «1D 
to firearm rolls if the user takes a full round to aim (in addition to the 
standard aiming bonus). 


SPECIALTY WEAPONS 


m BACNOR HAND BATON. 


The Bacnor hand baton is the perfect personal defense 
tool. Sometimes referred to as the "Bacnor backoff stick," 
this slender, rod-shaped device is ideally suited for those 
tight situations when you don't havethetimetofumble with 
larger, bulkier hand weapons. Each Bacnor baton comes 
complete with an ammo canister built into the framework of 
the device so there's never any need to worry if you re- 
loaded before you left home. 

The baton itself is simplicity itself to use. Simply point 


Fantastic Technology 


the weapon and activate it by squeezing the baton. When 
activated, the baton's power cell emits a stream of plasma 
energy that liquefies the ammo canister's outer casing. The 
combination of the plasma and the ammunition particles 
creates a beam blast up to five meters long in a cone up to 
three meters across at naximum range: in other words, one 
baton can stop a group of attackers. Anyone on the receiv- 
ing end of such a discharge will think twice about getting 
any closer. 


Model: Bacnor Armaments Hand Baton CPD-12 
Type: Anti-personnel defense weapon 
Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster 

Ammo: 1 

Cost: 50, 5 (ammo canister) 
Availability: 2, F, Ror X 

Fire Rate: 1 

Range: 0-2/3/5 

Blast Cone Width: 1/2/3 

Damage: 4D 


m CREDIT CASE SURPRISE 


Rumor has it that a famous Corellian smuggler created 
this device in order to escape a particularly tenacious 
bounty hunter; hearing about the encounter, an 
entrepreneuer began manufacturing the device as a self- 
defense item. 

On the outside, the "credit case surprise" is a standard 
credit case, although it has a small activation switch near 
therear ofthe case (not readily visible on casual inspection, 
but easy to find for those who know what they're looking 
for). Inside the case is a high power arc-light spotlight; when 
the switch is flipped, the spotlight is activated when the 
case’s lid is opened. When opened, it emits a blindingly 
intense flash of light. 


Model: Synnt-ovations, Inc. Credit Case Surprise 
Type: Personal defense item 
Cost: 75 


Fantastic Technology 


Availability: 2 

Range: 0-3/6/9/12 

Damage: 5D/3D/2D/1D stun damage (roiled against Strength or 
stamina) 

Game Notes: Easy Technical roll to build or repair. Anyone in a 60- 
degree arc in front of the light and within range must make a 
Moderate Perception roll not to be affected by the unit (they closed 
their eyes or looked away in time). 

Design: Scot Eddy (8th place) 


m ISH! TIB CORAL SCEPTER 


A favorite personal defense weapon among the Ishi Tib, 
the coral scepter is a staff-like weapon that uses spherical 
razor-sharp coral pellets (6 millimeters in diameter) pro- 
pelled by highly compressed, oxygenated water (essen- 
tially a high-power water jet). 

Each pellet is coated with an abrasive chemical adhesive 
that “sticks” and imbeds inside targets, causing additional 
bleeding damage. Rapid blood loss quickly leaves a would- 
be assailant too weak to continue, allowing the stereotypi- 
cal Ishi Tib hunter a "feast." 


Model: Tibrin Kish'nol ("Tibrin Exotic Armaments”) Ishi Tib Coral 
Scepter 

Type: Anti-personnel weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Archaic weapons 

Ammo: 12 (self-contained weapon, no reloads available) 

Cost: 1,200 

Availability: 4 

Body: 1D+1 

Range: 2-10/20/30 

Damage: 3D+1; with a wound or worse, the victim must make a 
Moderate stamina total each round for 1D rounds to resist the 
effects of blood loss; a failed stamina roll means the victim is at an 
additional -1D to all actions until healed. If the penalty equals or 
exceeds the target's stamina, the victim passes out and will bleed 
to death in 6D minutes. 


m MAGNA CASTER 


Sometimes a step back in technology is the best way to 
get a refinement. A case in point is the Magna Caster. The 
Magna Caster uses magnetic acceleration technology to 
enhance a weapon that's been around for centuries. The 
Magna Caster uses a closely-aligned set of coils to dramati- 
cally increasethe speed of a metal-tipped quarrel as it races 
along the barrel. The result is a projectile weapon that is 
tremendously powerful, ranking alongside the Wookiee 
bowcaster for stopping power. Moreover, the Magna Caster 


75 


~ [| GALLADINIUM 


is whisper-quiet — a plus when hunting easily startled prey. 
Each Magna Caster comes complete with a side-loading clip 
of 10 15-centimeter-long quarrels. Each is individually hand- 
loaded during manufacture so there is never a danger of 
accidental injury. The Magna Caster provides a long range 
hunting weapon that successfully merges the best of the old 
with the new. See for yourself why today's hunters are 
enthusiastic about this new twist on an old idea. 

Model: Frohad's Galactic Firearms Magna Caster-100 

Type: Magnetically-enhanced missile weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Ammo: 10 

Cost: 2,000, 150 (quarrel clip) 

Availability: 3, F 

Body: 2D 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 5-50/75/100 

Damage: 6D/5D/4D 


m MERR-SONN DISRUPTOR 


A controversial device if ever there was one, potential 
buyers are strongly encouraged to investigate local laws 
before attempting to purchase this weapon. 

The Merr-Sonn disruptor works by interrupting molecu- 
lar bonding. With the Merr-Sonn MSD-32, instead of over- 
coming molecular bonds with a single massive burst of 
energy, this weapon's blast combines a series of energy 
pulses to accomplish the desired effect. The result is a 
weapon that is just as effective as other disruptors, but has 
double the ammunition capacity of other disruptor models. 
Model: Merr-Sonn Munitions MSD-32 Disrupter Pistol 
Type: Anti-personnel weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: disruptor 
Ammo: 10 
Cost: 4,000 
Availability: 4, X 
Fire Rate: 2 
Range: 0-3/5/7 
Damage: 5D+2 


76 


E SLEEP INDUCER 


Not every weapon needs to fire a blast of charged par- 
ticles or expel a high velocity cartridge to disable an oppo- 
nent. Specializingin non-lethal weapons systems, Pacnorval 
has sought to use more humane forms of defense. The 
company's latest advancement is the SIL-50, which uses a 
focused cone of hypersonic wave energy emitted along 
frequencies coinciding with those generated by specific 
portions of the central nervous system in Humans. The net 
effect of this wave of energy is to artificially induce fatigue 
and bring about a sleep-like state. 

Though limited in range, itis surprisingly effective. Sound- 
less and fast-acting, often the recipient never knows what 
has happened until revived several hours later. While this 
unit is specifically calibrated for Humans, additional hyper- 
sonic freqency chips can be bought for Sullustans, Rodians, 
Wookiees and a number of other species; Pacnorval's scien- 
tists are hard at work on frequency chips for other species. 


Model: Pacnorval Defense Systems, Limited SIL-50 

Type: Sleep inducing stun weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster 

Ammo: 15 

Cost: 2,000, 100 (additional chips) 

Availability: 4, F 

Fire Rate: 1/2 (due to time needed for power recharge) 

Range: 0-3/5/10 

Damage: 5D (stun damage) 

Game Notes: Damage is rolled against the target's stamina; if the 
target is stunned or worse, the recipient must make a Moderate 
stamina roll not to pass out due to the sleep inducing frequencies. 
Sleep lasts for 1D hours. Frequency chips will only work against one 
specific species; changing a chip requires an Easy blaster repair roll 
and 3 minutes. 


m BIO-GUARD 


Personal sidearms require a certain level of proficiency 
while melee weapons mean you have to get close to your 
assailant for effective defense. If neither option is desireable, 
Bio-Guard is just right for you. 

Other chemical agent defenses use a single compounded 
which may or may not be effective against a given species. 
A confrontation is hardly the time to find out your chemical 
defense doesn’t work against an alien assailant! Bio-Guard 
uses a unique combination of multiple chemical agents to 
stop an attacker in mid-stride. With Bio-Guard, your chances 
of escape are greatly increased no matter who you are 
facing. It’s cheap at twice the price. 


ME TEX —_ || 


Fantastic Technology 


BGALI. ADINIUM 


Model: Xerithin Chemical Combinations BGA-900 Bio-Guard 
Type: Personal defense device 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Cost: 100, 10 (ammo) 

Availability: 3, possibly F or R 

Range: 0-2/3/5 

Game Notes: Bio-Guard is a cylindrical tube measuring 12 centime- 
ters in length by 2 centimeters in diameter. It is operated by firm 
pressure on a control stud; once fired, it must be replaced. 
When activated, emitters sprays a concentrated stream of four 
different chemical components, each in rapid succession. As alien 
biologies differ dramatically, the effects of the device's individual 
agents may not always prove equally effective with every species. 
Reactive Agents: 

Agent BGI: 5D stun damage. Stunned result inhibits motor func- 
tions in humanoid life-forms. 

Agent BG2: 4D stun damage. Stunned result produces extreme 
irritation to skin, meaning -2D to all Dexterity or Strength related 
skills for 1Dx10 minutes. 

Agent BG3: 4D stun damage. Stunned result means blindness for 1D 
minutes, with a -2D penalty to all actions involving sight. 

Agent BG4: 4D stund damage. Stunned result causes the victim to 
pass out for 1D minutes. 


im BIO-TRACTANT REPULSOR 


A decidedly different type of personal defense item, the 
bio-tractant uses a powerful chemical spray based on phero- 
mones. This highly concentrated spray has been chemi- 
cally enhanced to produce a calming and soothing reaction 
on the part of anyone of a particular species. Once a person 
is sprayed with the repulsor, the result is often a sense of 
calm and peace (or at the very least, confusion), giving the 
attack victim the chance to escape. 

This device will only work on a specific species — e.g., a 
calming potion for Humans will have no effect on that 
Gamorrean that’s about to throttle you! 


Model: Brisallon Chemical Consolidated Bio-Tractant Repulsor 
Type: Anti-personnel weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms 

Cost: 200, 5 (1 dose; many different species available) 
Availability: 4 

Ammo: 6 (individual canisters) 

Body: 1D 

Range: 0-5 (Moderate difficulty) 

Damage: Special damage (see below) 

Game Notes: The recipient of a successful hit (if of the appropriate 
species) must make a Difficult willpower roll to continue any 
attacks or hostile actions against the user. If the victim makes the 
roll, he or she is unaffected. 


m DROID DISABLER 


While time and again droids have proven to be reliable 
tools in our galaxtic society, there is still the very real 
chance of a serious and possibly dangerous malfunction. 
Never fear with a droid emergency shutdown controller! 

Unlike standard droid restraining devices that need be 
physically attached to the droid, this hand-held device 
unleashes an ion-accelerated energy blast that ionizes the 


Fantastic Technology 


droid, preventing further operation. Meanwhile, anyone 
standing nearby notices only a slight tinge from the energy 
surge. 

The droid can usually be reactivated without loss of 
memory or ability, but it sometimes needs a complete 
system restart. 

Model: Felebreck Electrical Defense Systems Droid Disabler 
Type: Droid ionizer 

Skill: Blaster 

Ammo: 5; uses standard power packs 

Cost: 700, 25 (power pack) 

Availability: 3 

Range: 0-5/7/10 

Damage: 4D ionization damage 


m WRIST VAC BLADES 


Prized for its silent precision and dependability, a pair of 
wrist vac blades will cause even the most hardened criminal 
to think twice before confronting you in a dark alley. 

Each band sports two vacuum sealed containment slots, 
each of which holds a trio of 3-centimeter diameter circular 
alloyed metal blades. By pressing a release-stud, the trio of 
sharp blades spins off in the desired direction. A separate 
control stud can modify the width of the discharge pattern. 
Replacement container clips hold a single blade load. 


Model: Golon Arms Vac Attack Mk-127 

Type: Anti-personnel weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapon: vac blade 

Ammo: 2 (3 blades per shot) 

Cost: 700, 30 (blade clip) 

Availability: 3, F 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 10-20/30/50 

Damage: 5D (combined) 

Game Notes: Fire arc can be spread up to 60-degrees, allowing for 
separate attacks at 3D damage, but each separate target means a 
separate missile weapons roll. 


77 


~ GALL dINIUM 


Illustration by Stephen Crane 


AN OVERVIEW OF BLASTER REPAIR PROCEDURES ... 


Individuals wishing to make proper use of their blaster 
repair kits are encouraged to review the "How Blasters 
Work" (on page 63 of Cracken's Rebel Field Guide). The 
following notes explain how parts in the blaster repair kit 
are employed. 

All bonuses for repair operations are for damaged de- 
vices and apply only to restoring lost dice of damage. Repair 
procedures do not add bonuses to damage. 

( References below are specifically for the BlasTech DL-44 
heavy blaster pistol but reflect repairs that can be made with 
other blaster models) 

Pulse Adaptor Module Tester: A testing unit designed 
to record the amount of resistance charge that has built up 
in the barrel chamber due to damaged static pulse adap- 
tors. This test is a Very Easy blaster repair difficulty; suc- 
cess on the test offers the user a +1D bonus to blaster repair 
totals when using the collimator beam focuser for repairs 
and allows the repair time to be cut to 20 minutes. 

Collimator Beam Focuser: A probe-like device, the 
collimator beam focuser is inserted along the barrel length 
to realign the prismatic crystal housing and recalibrate 
static pulse adaptors. If the crystal housing is damaged, the 
whole unit will have to be replaced using the prismatic 
crystal aligner (below). A successful adjustment requires a 
Moderate blaster repair total and takes 30 minutes. 

Prismatic Crystal Aligner: This device is used to re- 
move and replace the entire prismatic crystal housing if 
the crystals are cracked or the unit is damaged. This task 
requires a Difficult blaster repair total and takes three 
hours. 

Static Pulse Adaptor Modules: Refers to one of several 
static pulse adaptor circuitry modules (blasters have a 
variable number of modules, normally four for pistols and 
six for blaster rifles and heavy blaster pistols; there are 
many different types of modules). Replacing a single mod- 
ule is an Easy blaster repair difficulty and takes 15 minutes. 
After new adaptor modules are installed, the collimator 
beam focuser must be used to calibrate the adaptors. 

Energy Converter Valve: Refers to the Heter-Valve 
(commonly called the energy converter valve) and re- 
places a damaged Heter-Valve. À damaged Heter-Valve can 
allow too much gas to flow into the XCiter (increasing a 
weapon's damage by 1D, but on a roll of 1 on the Wild Die 
the weapon overloads, causing 1D-3D "blast-back" damage 
totheuser and destroying the weapon). Easy blaster repair 
total and one hour to replace 


Multiple Gas Valve Nozzles: Refers to the use of a 
standard gas refill valve. Multiple valve nozzles of differing 
sizes and shapes are required to accommodate different 
blaster designs. Replacing a damaged gas valve requires an 
Easy blaster repair total and takes 30 minutes. 

Power Pack Recharger: This is a generic interfacetothe 
internal power pack and is used to recharge the unit from 
external sources. The power pack must be partially re- 
leased by using the power pack release lever, then the 
cable can be plugged into a socket on the bottom of the 
power pack. Attaching the cable requires a Very Easy 
blaster repair roll and about three minutes; the actual 
recharge takes about one hour. 

Universal Power Pack (with adaptors): If no external 
power source is available for use with the power pack 
recharger, then a generic replacement for the original 
power pack can be used (with appropriate adaptors). 
Replacement with this universal a power pack takes five 
minutes and requires an Easy blaster repair difficulty, but 
the weapon’s damage is reduced by -1D because of the 
energy lost by the adaptors. 

Power Pack Cable: This cable runs from the power pack 
to the XCiter and will differ from weapon to weapon; 
several types of replacements are in the repair kit. Replac- 
ing the cable requires an Easy blaster repair roll and takes 
an hour (due to the need to take apart the weapon for 
repairs). 

Spare Gas Container: The canister of tolium gas in the 
repair kit is one of several common blaster gases used for 
blaster weapons. Refilling a blaster’s gas chamber is a Very 
Easy blaster repair task and takes 10 minutes. 

Spare Trigger Cable: The blaster trigger cable is nor- 
mally well-protected but damage or superheating can cause 
fraying, leading to intermittent weapon failures and mis- 
fires. Replacing the cable is an Easy blaster repair difficulty 
and takes 10 minutes. 

Variable Pressure Adjustor: This small adjustor on the 
XCiter regulates how much excited blaster gas leaves the 
XCiter and enters the actuating blaster module. Improper 
setting can cause too much gas to be fed into the actuator, 
causing overloads, misfires or a loss of firepower over time. 
Calibrating a misaligned adjustor is an Easy blaster repair 
difficulty and takes 10 minutes; replacing a damaged adjus- 
tor is a Moderate blaster repair difficulty and takes 30 
minutes. 


STATIC PULSE PRISMATIC XCITER 
ADAPTOR PRONGS CRYSTAL HETER-VALVE 
GALVEN PATTERN HOUSING ACTUATING {ENERGY re aie 
DAMPING SLEEVE STATIC PULSE BLASTER ve! 
(FOR STUN SETTING} ADAPTORS 


Em 

STUN | 
SETTING GALVEN CIRCUITRY 
SWITCH AIR 


COOLING 
VENTS 


OVERLOAD 
STURM DOWEL 


POWER PACK CABLE 


78 


— 


SAFETY 


POWER PACK 
RELEASE LEVER 


GAS CHAMBER 


GAS REFILL 
VALVE 
DIFFUSION 
UNIT 


POWER FLUX 
DISPERSION UNIT 


A 
D 
= A N 

| S 


PLATE 
APAS 
CONNECTORS 


AREA 


Fantastic Technology 


ACCESSORIES 


EB BLASTER REPAIR KIT 


Being stuck alone in the field, kilometers from civiliza- 
tion, is not the ideal place to find yourself saying, "I wish I 
had ..." 

Be prepared. 

Model: BlasTech Blaster Repair Kit 

Type: Deluxe blaster repair kit 

Skill: Blaster repair 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Each repair kit contains the following: pulse adaptor 
module tester, collimator beam focuser, prismatic crystal aligner, 
static pulseadaptor modules, energy converter valve (Heter-Valve), 
multiple gas valve nozzles, power pack recharger, universal power 
pack, power pack cables, spare gas container, spare trigger cable 
and a variable pressure adjustor 


m PORTABLE CLIP RECHARGER 


Military units on the go seldom have the time to wait for 
their power packs and clips to be recharged, nor do they 
have the room to carry a large number of spare clips. The 
portable clip recharger goes along way toward solving the 
problem. 

Therecharger is along, thin metal box with six slots. The 
soldiers merely need to jam their clips into the appropriate 
slots (adaptors are provided for many common power pack 
types). In two minutes, the clips are charged and ready for 
action (a red indicator lights when a clip is fully charged). 
Each recharger can charge 30 clips before it needs recharg- 
ing from a power generator (which takes three hours). 

Three different companies manufacture essentially the 
same device: BlasTech produced the "Ramtek," Capris Tech- 
nologies ("CapTech") makes the “CapTech Stealthpak,” and 
Power Products, Ltd. makes the “Ultrapaq.” 

Model: BlasTech Ramtek 

Type: Portable clip recharger 

Cost: 750 

Availability: 4, F or R 

Design: Scot Eddy (honorable mention) 


GAILADINIUM f 


m BLASTER TARGET BOARD 


Finding a place for target practice can be difficult, espe- 
cially aboard a starship. CapTech’s blaster target board 
helps solve that problem. The primary part of the board is 
a thin, flexible sheeting 2.5 by 2.5 meters. The second part 
of the board is the small targeting computer, which is 
attached to the sheet by traditional scomp links. 

The computer projects a series of targets which can vary 
in number, size and speed. The user sets his or her blaster 
for stun. A standard sighting coupling (available for about 
90 credits in most weapons shops) should be mounted on 
the end of the blaster barrel. The user then simply com- 
pletes the target fire sequence. 

Model: Capris Technologies Blaster Target Board 

Type: Personal target practice board 

Cost: 450 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: While this device offers no immediate benefit, 
gamemasters may choose to allow characters who take target 
practice regularly to advance their blaster skill at a reduced Skill 
Point cost. 

Design: Scot Eddy (honorable mention) 


m ULTRASONIC SIGHTING SYSTEM 


There’s along-running joke that gun control means being 
able to hit your target. This is where Novaless’s latest sound 
imaging targeting scope comes into play. 

Conventional blaster scopes generally fall into one of 
three different categories: scopes that magnify available 
light, devices that use a form of laser guidance system to 
signature “paint” their target, and those that track their 
target through a heat source. In any of these instances, too 
many heat sources can confuse tracking systems and what 
works weil in one situation may not work well in others. 

Novaless’s imaging system uses a pair of ultrasonic 
beam emitters operating at different frequencies to sight on 
a selected target. As collectors receive the slightly different 
wave patterns returned from a target, a small data analyzer 
constructs a three-dimensional “sound pattern” the user 
sees through the scope. The sound pattern is unaffected by 
the level of light or heat present that might otherwise 
render more conventional sighting systems ineffective. 


err 
Fantastic Technology 


79 


- [| GALL ANNIUM 


Model: Novaless Soni-Optics Target Imager 

Type: Sonic targeting system 

Skill: Blaster 

Cost: 800 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Device adds +1D+2 to blasterrolls when firer takes one 
round to aim (this is in addition to the normal aiming bonus). 
Maximum effective range is 50 meters. 


ARMOR 


mi DAMPENER AEROSOL 


For those who don't want to wear bulky armor but want 
that added bit of protection, there is the Passive Defender 
PD-0943. The PD-0943 is a hand-held, 
easy to operate device that sprays a 
gas mixtureof courenth and ves, which 
disperses blaster bolts on contact. 
The result is concentrated personal 
protection that's dependable in an 
emergency. 

Model: Zemphyr Defenders, Incorporated 
Passive Defender PD-0943 

Type: Blaster dispersion system 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Cost: 600 

Availability: 3, F or R 

Game Notes: The PD Canister is a cylinder 
10 centimeters long by 4 centimeters in 
diameter; it hasthree charges. Each charge 
produces a visible cloud that covers a one 
meter cubical area. Any blaster bolt enter- 
ing the cloud loses -1D of damage. The cloud lasts for one minute 
(barring heavy winds or precipitation). Additional charges in the 
same area have no additional benefit. 


m COMBAT JUMPSUIT 


The combat jumpsuit is a one piece outfit that can be 
tailored to fit most individuals. While not as good as full- 
fledged armor, it provides modest protection with a mini- 
mum of weight. [t can be combined with blast vests and 
other armor types or concealed beneath “street clothes.” 

The jumpsuit is durable, with padding around the torso, 
elbows and knees. Though tight-fitting, the material breathes 
well and dries quickly. A number of hooks, rings and other 
attachments are placed around the suit to hold tools and 
weapons. When reinforced with gloves, boots and a stan- 
dard blast helmet, the suit provides excellet protection 
from minor abrasions. 


80 


Model: A/KT Tuffl Combat Jumpsuit 

Type: Combat jumpsuit 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Provides +1D physical, +2 energy protection. 
Design: Dennis F. Belanger (honorable mention) 


i AV-1 POWER ARMOR 


AV-1 power armor fills the need for portable, sturdy 
armor. Three models of AV-1 armor are available: AV-1S 
(scout), AV-1C (combat), and AV-1A (assault). 

When rolling for damage to AV-1 power armor, use the 
charts below. 


AV-1 ARMOR DAMAGE CHART 


gm LIGHTLY DAMAGED ARMOR 
Roll Result 


i -1D from Strength enhancements 

2 -5 from Move of repulsorlift engine 

3 On board weapon hit and destroyed 
4-6 Armor loses one pip off its effectiveness 


m HEAVILY DAMAGED ARMOR 
Roll Result 


l Power loss for 1D rounds 
2-3 -2D from Strength enhancements 
4-5 -2D to Dexterity and all related skills 
6 Armor loses -1D off its effectiveness 


m SEVERELY DAMAGED ARMOR 
Roll Result 


l Power loss for 2D rounds 

2 Power overload or power generator destroyed; 
wearer suffers 5D damage in explosion 

3 Overloaded power generator will explode in 1D 
rounds 

4 All weapons disabled 

5 Armor loses all protection bonus at location of 
hit (head, torso, arm or leg) 

6 Armor toppled in assault, all power lost, suit 


non-functional 


Design: Dennis F. Belanger (22nd place) 
m AV-1S (SCOUT) 


AV-1S scout power armor is a battle suit with servo 
enhancement and a built-in repulsorlift engine. The unit can 
operate for up to 36 hours before replenishing supplies. It 
takes five minutes to put on the suit. 


Fantastic Technology 


GAI_|ADINIUM 


Model: GTU AV-1S Armor 
Type: Powersuit 

Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: 7,500 

Availability: 3, F 

Game Effect: 

Basic Suit: +1D energy, +1D+1 
physical protection, -1D Dexter- 
ity and all related skills. 
Enhanced Strength: +1D to 
Strength for all skills, in- 
cluding melee and un- 
armed combat damage. 


of 20, flight ceiling of 100 
meters. Maneuver rolls : 
are made with the 
powersuit operation 
skill. p 
Infrared Imaging Mod- ^ 
ule: Ranged up to 200 
meters, allows vision | Je 
based on heat. n 4 Qiu. 
Starlight Imaging: Magnifies avail- ! /4 mensa 
able light for excellent low-light 
vision (no penalties for darkness 
except in absolute darkness, but 
sudden flashes of light can cause 
4D stun damage if the user does 
not make a Moderate Perception roll to close his or her eyes in time) 
Power Lamp: 100 meter range 

Multi-channel Comm Unit: Includes comlink encoder, ranged up to 
50 kilometers, and external amplifier 

Macrobinoculars: Standard rules as for macrobinoculars 

5 Sureseal Patches: Automatic patches against suit leaks. 
Bio-Readout: Informs wearer of his/her physical condition 
Environment Scanner: Scans air for breathability and toxins and 
detects harmful radiation 


m AV-1C (COMBAT) 


An armored battle suit with a comprehensive weapon 
integration and targeting system (WITS). It can operate for 
24 hours without replenishing supplies and takes 10 min- 
utes to put on. 

Model: GTU AV-1C Power Suit 
Type: Powersuit 

Skill: Powersuit operation 

Cost: 12,000 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Effect: 

Battle Suit: Provides «2D physical 
and energy, -1D to Dexterity and 
related skills 

Strength Enhancement: «2D to 
Strength and related skills, but any 
failed Strength or related roll strips 
the servos, causing a full malfunction 
of the suit for 1D rounds; also roll ID; if 
the result is 1-2, the wearer suffers 4D 
stun damage from arcing electricity 
Repulsorlift Engine: Move of 20, flight 
ceiling of 100 meters. Maneuver rolls are g 
made with the powersuit operation skill. | 
Infrared Imaging Module: Ranged up to 
200 meters, allows vision based on heat. 
Starlight Imaging: Magnifies available 
light for excellent low-light vision (no 
penalties for darkness except in abso- 
lute darkness, but sudden flashes of 
light can cause 4D stun damage if the 
user does not make a Moderate Perception roll to close his or her 
eyes in time) 


Power Lamp: 100 meter range 

Multi-channel Comm Unit: Includes comlink encoder, ranged up to 
50 kilometers, and external amplifier 

Macrobinoculars: Standard rules as for macrobinoculars 

5 Sureseal Patches: Automatic patches against suit leaks. 
Bio-Readout: Informs wearer of his/her physical condition 

WITS: Allows the wearer to link two weapons into the suit's battle 
computer, getting «1D to hit for each weapon. 


m AV-1A (ASSAULT) 


The most expensive and powerful suit GTU makes, it is 
among the most sophisticated suits available. It can opera- 
tion for 12 hours without replenishment of resources and 
takes 15 minutes to put on. 

Model: GTU AV-1A Power Suit 

Type: Powersuit 

Skill: Powersuit operation 

Cost: 50,000 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Effect: 

Battle Suit: Provides +2D+2 physical and energy, -2D to Dexterity and 
related skills 

Strength Enhancement: «3D to Strength and related skills, but any 
failed Strength or related roll strips the servos, causing a full 
malfunction of the suit for ID rounds; 

also roll 1D; if the result is 1-2, the 

wearer suffers 4D stun damage from | 

arcing electricity : 
Repulsorlift Engine: Move of 20, 
flight ceiling of 100 meters. Ma- 
neuver rolls are made with the 
powersuit operation skill. 
Infrared Imaging Module: i 
Ranged up to 200 meters, „47⁄4 
allows vision based on  ? ssi 
heat. 

Starlight Imaging: Magni- 
fies available light for 
excellent low-light vision 
(no penalties for dark- 
ness except in absolute 
darkness, but sudden 
flashes of light can cause 4D 
stun damage if the user does 
not make a Moderate Dex- 
terity roll to close his or 
her eyes in time) 

Power Lamp: 100 meter 


range 
Multi-channel Comm 
Unit: Includes 


comlink encoder, 

ranged up to 50 kilometers, and external amplifier 
Macrobinoculars: Standard rules as for macrobinoculars 

5 Sureseal Patches: Automatic patches against suit leaks. 
Bio-Readout: Informs wearer of his/her physical condition 

WITS: Allows the wearer to linkthree weapons into the suit's battle 
computer, getting +2D+2 to hit for each weapon. 

Integrated Medpac System: Has first aid skill at 4D. 

Rocket Ejection Sysem: Ejects occupant if suit suffers heavy damage 
on a roll of 1-2 on ID. 


Fantastic Technology 


81 


Weapon Datachart 


Galladinium maintains a large stock of arms. The following chart lists weapons currently in stock. Each section opens with a listing of 
"standard" weapons, which correspond to averages for the category and can serve as a benchmark for the creation of new weapons. 


Item 


Staff/club? 
Spear? 
Gaderffii? 
Knife? 
Hatchet? 
Bayonet? 
Sword? 


Ekkar Àrms coyn'skar! 


Ekkar Arms sat'skar! 

Ekkar Arms d'skar! 

Ekkar Arms ar'gor? 

Rodian ceremonial dagger® 


www C2 


Melee Weapons 


Cost 


15 
60 
50 
25 
35 
15 
125 


400 


700 
150 
175 
160 


Damage 


STR+1D 
STR+1D+1 
STR+1D 
STR+1 to STR+1D 
STR+2 
STR+1D 
STR+2D 


STR+2D (blade), 
STR+2 (hook) 


STR+3D+1 
STR+1D+1 
STR+1D+2 
STR+1D+1 


Powered Melee Weapons 


Difficulty 


Very Easy 
Easy 
Very Easy 
Very Easy 
Easy 
Easy 
Moderate 


Moderate (blade), 


Very Difficult (disarm with hook) 


Difficult 
Moderate 
Moderate 

Easy 


Item Where Cost Damage Difficulty 
Vibro-ax? 2,R 500 STR+2D to STR+3D+1 Moderate 
Vibroblade”’ 2,F 250 STR+1D+2 to STR+3D Moderate 
Vibrobayonet? 2,F 300 STR+1D+2 Easy 
Vibro-shiv?? 2 200 STR+1D Easy 
Force Pike? 2,R 500 STR+2D Moderate 
Powerstaff® 2,ForR 300 STR+1D+2 Easy 
Buzz-knuck?? 2,R 550 STR+1D, 6D/Stun Difficult 
Neuronic Whip? 2,R 450 STR+1D, 4D/Stun Moderate 
Power Sword? 2,R 600 STR+3D Difficult 
Stun Baton? 2,ForR 500 STR+1D, 5D/Stun Moderate 
Koromondain PDS 

Model SVT-300 Stun Cloak” 2 1,500 5D/Stun Moderate 
Merr-Sonn Stun Baton?! R 300 STR+2D+2 Difficult 
Palandrix Power Cane 3, F, Ror X 400 STR+1D, 1D-5D Easy, Moderate 
Sancretti Rodian Cyrogen Whip 3, F, Ror X 350 STR+1D, 4D/Stun Moderate 
Sabrashi FSI-200 Fear Stick 4,F 600 2D/Stun Moderate 
SoroSuub Controller 

FP Force Pike?’ 2,R 500 STR+2D Moderate 
Torgorian Yil Tribe Scimitar 4,ForR 8,500 STR+2D, 4D/Stun Moderate 
Yalandross Jengardin 

Vibroblade 4,F,RorxX 6,000 STR+4D+1 Difficult 
Xana MSW-9 Molecular Stiletto 4, RorX 400 STR«2D Moderate 


Ranged Weapons 
Hold-Out Blasters Sporting Blasters 


Item Where Cost Damage Item Where Cost Damage 
Hold-Out Blaster? 2, R 300 3D+1 Sporting Blaster? 2,R 300 3D+1 
Palm Blaster!! 2 200 2D Drearian Defense 
BlasTech HSB-200 2 R 300 3D«1 Conglomerate Defender? 1,F 350 3D-1 
Czerka 411? 2,R 300 3D«1 Luxan Penetrator 
panies i MB-450 4,ForR 600 5D 
Happy Surprise" 2 R 325 3D+] Merr-Sonn “Quick” 65 2,R 325 3D+2 
Merr-Sonn 
Munitions Q2? 2,RorX 215 3D 
Imperial Arms 
Model 22T4" X 375 3D+1 
Soro-Suub Q-2 ? 2,RorX 350 3D+2 


82 


Fantastic Technology 


Blaster Pistols 


Item 


Blaster Pistol? 


BlasTech DL-18 
Blaster Pistol? 


Elmainin Armaments 
SBP-200 


Galinolo XiX!” 


Merr-Sonn Intimidator 
IR-5 

Merr-Sonn 
Model 44!5 


Merr-Sonn Model 434 
DeathHammer? 


Merr-Sonn Munitions 
DD6? 


Heavy Blaster Pistols 


Item 


Heavy Blaster Pistol? 
BlasTech DL-44? 
BlasTech DY-225" 


Merr-Sonn 
“Flash” 42 


SoroSuub Model 
Kylan-3? 


Calban Model X? 


Where 


1, R 


1, F,R or X 


1, F 
1,ForR 


3, X 


1,ForR 


1,ForR 


1,ForR 


Where 


2,X 
A,RorX 
A, RorX 


A,RorX 


2,RorX 
2, RorX 


Cost 


500 


500 


400 
500 


1,250 


500 


850 


550 


Cost 


750 
750 
750 


750 


750 
750 


Damage 


Damage 


Blaster Carbines 


Item 


Blaster Carbine”? 


BlasTech 
Sharpshooter V?' 


BlasTech 
StarSlasher?! 

SoroSuub Bi-Polar 
Blaster BMC-150 

SoroSuub QuickSnap 
361? 

SoroSuub QuickSnap 
36T/P 


SoroSuub Stormtrooper 
Two!* 


Where 


1, R 


dou 


2, X 


4,RorX 


2,F,RorX 


2,R 


2,RorxX 


Cost Damage 
900 5D 
1,200 4D«1 
900 5D 
1,000 4D, 6D 
900 5D 
900 4D«1 
2,400 6D+2 


Repeating Blasters 


Item 


Repeating Blaster ? 


Medium Repeating 
Blaster? 


Heavy Repeating 
Blaster? 


Atgar BI/al5 Picket Gun 
BlasTech T-21? 


Where 


2, X 
2, X 


2,R 
2, R 
2, X 


Cost Damage 
2,000 6D 
3,000 7D 
5,000 8D 
5,000 6D 
2,000 6D 


Missile Weapons 


Item Where Cost Damage 
Hunting Blasters 
Item Where Cost Damage Rocket Dart 
Launcher? 3, Ror X 2,000 6D 
» Concussion Grenade 
23 
MS — a i i Launcher” 3,Ror X 2,200 6D 
rearian Defense 31 i 
Conglomerate Dart Shooter 1, F 350 Varies 
"Light Sport"? 2,R 900 4D+1 Portable Rocket 
Herloss HBt-4 Launcher? 3, X 2,600 6D 
Hunting Blaster 3 500 5D Aeramaxis Concussion 
Missile Launcher? 2,F,RorX 2,000 7D 
" BlasTech CSPL-12 
Blaster Rifles “Caspel”? 2 X 3,000 Variable 
Item Where Cost Damage Golon Arms FC1 
Flechette Launcher?! 2,F,RorX 800 Varies 
Blaster Rifle? 2, X 1,000 5D Eon MENU 
"o ode -] Micro- 
Blaster Rifle” 2, X 2,000 6D Grenade Launcher’! 3, F 2,500 4D 
25 
BlasTech A280 3,RorX 1,400 5D+2 Locris Syndicates 
BlasTech E-11 Military Model RDP-12 Rocket 
Issue Blaster Rifle?! A RorX 1,000 oD Launcher™ 3,ForR 1,500 4D or 5D/Stun 
BlasTech EKX-10*° 3,R or X 1,100 5D Loronar ABX-110 
Merr-Sonn G85 2,RorX 1,250 4D+1 Tube-Launched ABC 
" " Scrambler* 2,R or X 3,000 8D/Stun 
SoroSuub “H.Tracker 
1625 2 RorX 1.000 SD Malaxan FWG-5 3,ForR 500 3D-5D . 
SoroSuub Stormtrooper Merr-Sonn PLX2 
One? 2 X 1,000 5D "Plex"? 2,X 4.000 6D 
SoroSuub Stormtrooper Mon Cal Defenses 
Two 2, X 1,600 5D+2 Mini-Torpedo 
Launcher? 3, X 1,250 6D 
Prax HB-4 Projectile 
Rifle 4, ForR 1,500 5D 
Fantastic Technology 83 


Missile Weapons Continued 


Item Where Cost Damage 
Prax Protector 

PRP-500 Hold-Out 

Dart Pistol 2,ForR 250 1D, 3D-5D 
Salus DF-D1 

Flechette Rifle?" 3,RorX 1,000 5D 
Soro-Suub Firestorm-1 

Mini-Missile 

Launcher? 3,RorX 1,500 5D 
Zone Control Viper 

Grenade Launcher? 32, R 500 Variable 


Item Where Cost Damage 
Black-Powder Pistol? 2,R 200 2D+2 
Musket? 2,R 250 3D 
Slugthrower? 2,R 275 3D 
Rifle? 2,R 300 3D+1 
Submachinegun? 2,R 600 4D 
Slug Pistol? 2,ForR 450 4D 
Adostic Arms 

8-guage shotgun' 3, R 500 5D 
Aeramaxis PDW-50 

Ionic Tingler 3,ForR 300 2D, 1D-5D/Stun 
Czerka Adjudicator 2,ForR 300 4D 
Golon Arms Blister 

Blaster 3,ForR 300 4D, 3D/Burns 
Kelvarlek Dissuader 3,F 400 3D, 3D/Burns 
Oriolanis Blaster Buster 2, or R 350 3D 
Sevari Flashpistol”” 4 50-500 4D+2 
Item Where Cost Damage 
Stun Pistol? 1, F 200 3D/Stun 
Riot Gun” 2, R 750 8D/Stun 
Disruptor PistoP! 4, X 3,000 6D+2 
Flame Projector? A4 RorX 2,500 5D 
Bacnor Hand Baton 

CPD-12 2,F,RorX 50 4D 
BlasTech Firearc49 

Speargun? 3, X 300 5D, 4D 
BlasTech Riot Gun?! 2,R 1,500 5D+1 
BlasTech ST-90 Stun Pistol 1, F 200 6D/Stun 
Brisallon Bio- 

Tractant Repulsor 4 200 Special 
Connor APNG3 

Net Gun? 2,RorX 150 5D, 5D/Stun 
Corondexx VES-700 

Pulse Rifle? 4, X 5.000 6D 
Denelex Neuro-Pistol 3,X 500 4D/Stun 
Felebreck Droid Disabler 3 100 4D/lonization 
Frohad Magna Caster-100 3,F 2,000 6D/5D/4D 
Golon Arms RGL-80 

Flectronet* 2,F 2,000 1-10D 
Golon Arms Vac Attack 

Mk-127 Vac Blades Job 700 5D 
84 


Specialty Weapons Continued 


Item Where Cost Damage 
Koromondian PDS Model 

RLW-77 Wrist Lasers? 2.F 2,000 4D 
Mennotor DAS-430 Neural 

Inhibitor’ 4.RorX 5,000 3D+1, 6D/Stun 
Merr-Sonn Anti-Riot 

Tangle Gun 7? 3, X 300 4D 
Merr-Sonn DEMP Gun, 

Handgun?’ 2,R 500 2D-4D 
Merr-Sonn DEMP Gun, . 

Carbine? 2,R 750 3D-5D 
Merr-Sonn MSD-32 

Disruptor 4, X 4,000 5D+2 
Pacnorval SIL-50 

Sleep Inducer 4,F 2,000 oD/Stun 
Prax Arms Model 

AXM-50 “Blast and 

Smash"* 3,ForR 4.500 5D, 4D 
Salus Tangler Elite 1?" 3 900 2D, 4D/Stun 
SoroSuub Equalizer 

lon Cannon? 2,X 5,000 3D/lonization 
Stokhli Spray 

Stick® 3,ForR 800 6D/Stun 
Synnt-ovations Credit 

Cast Surprise 2 75 5D/3D/2D/1D/Stun 
Thalaxxian Corodex 

Snare (Slaver 

Snare Gun)? 3, For X 1,200 2D/Stun 
Tibrin Kish’nol Ishi 

Tib Coral Scepter 4 1,200 3D+1 
Xerithin BGA-900 

Bio-Guard 3,ForR 100 Varies 


'Pages 140-141 of the Star Wars Planets Collection 
*Page 38 of Wanted by Cracken 

?Page 55 of Wanted by Cracken 

‘Page 83 of Wanted by Cracken 

"Page 84 of Wanted by Cracken 

*Page 41 of Cracken’s Rebel Operatives 

‘Page 46 of Cracken’s Rebel Operatives 

‘Page 47 of Cracken's Rebel Operatives 

"Page 60 of Cracken’s Rebel Operatives 

"Page 71 of Cracken's Rebel Operatives 

!Page 79 of Cracken’s Rebel Operatives 

"Page 71 of Star Wars Adventure Journal #2 

Page 69 of Star Wars Adventure Journal #1 

"Page 9 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
PPage 11 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
Page 14 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
7 Page 26 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
Page 27 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
"Page 35 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
“Page 54 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
"Page 56 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
?Page 63 of Galaxy Guide 9: Fragments from the Rim 
Page 99 of Star Wars Sourcebook, Second Edition 
“Page 141 of Star Wars Sourcebook, Second Edition 
5Page 100 of Rebel Alliance Sourcebook, Second Edition 
"Page 112 of Heir to the Empire Sourcebook 

“Pages 121-129 of Imperial Sourcebook, Second Edition 
? Page 112 of Dark Force Rising Sourcebook 

*°Page 42 of Dark Empire Sourcebook 

Pages 239-241 Star Wars Adventure Journal #3 
31Pages 116-118 of Han Solo and the Corporate Sector Sourcebook 
?Page 81 of Galaxy Guide 11: Criminal Organizations 
3Page 67 of Galaxy Guide 10: Bounty Hunters 

VPages 82-86 of Galaxy Guide 10: Bounty Hunters 
Pages 72-74 of Cracken' s Rebel Field Guide 


Fantastic Technology 


a ALI. ADINIUM 


SPECIAL OFFERINGS 


In recognition of your status as a Galladinium Pre- 
ferred Customer, the following items are being offered to 
you exclusively through this special datalog edition. 
These items will not appear in our standard merchan- 
dise datalog available to the general public. 


m ABYSSIN GRAFTING PATCH 
While a medpatch is fine for most applications, some- 
times extensive injuries can occur that require additional 
cellular reconstructive efforts. He Abyssin grafting 


number of regenerative cells deri 
chemical extracts. When applied to the sur 
the regenerative properti e ex 
begin to work on surround 
unlike immersion in a ba 
formed skin cells begin to 
area, eventually covering 
pletely. 

While not available in stand; 
many medical facilities are beginn 
Model: Kirgalis Pharmaceutical Export: 
Type: Regenerative grafting patch 
Skill: First aid or medicine 
Cost: 5,000 
Availability: 3 ER 
Game Notes: A Difficult first aid or Easy me 


these matches, 


Character is: Treatment time: 
Wounded 2D hours 
Incapacitated 8D hours 
Mortally wounded 2D days 


After a patch is used once, it is all used up and new patches must 
be bought. Many lifeforms with natural regenerative abilities have 
a high resistance to the effects of this patch. 


D TO THE WISE ... 


reement for cellular extractions 
he Abyssin tribes; most 
ly hostile to off-worlders. 
ibal policy could result 
and the loss of future 
stracts for the patches. 
y limited supply of these 
- customers to act now 


normal application. As with bacta tanks, the patient will heal if armor ves 


allowed to rest, but the healing time depends upon the severity of 
the injury: 


Wie, om LA. n 


in a saline solution: inside a protective, ablative shell. The 
microbes thrive on some forms of radiation, such as those 
generated by a blaster discharge. Practically speaking, 
these microbes lie dormant until they are given a dose of 
blaster energy. They then absorb the blaster energy as it is 
diffused by contact with the vest’s outer layer, using the 
high energy radiation to rapidly reproduce (their short 
lifespan is measured in seconds, however, preventing growth 
from exceeding design limitations). Additional microbe 
generations add to the overall effectiveness of the vest 
itself. The wearer is thus presented with a protective gar- 
ment that actually improves its effectiveness with contin- 
ued exposure to energy weapon blasts. | 


Product Note: While capable of absorbing large doses of 
radiation, the native microbes used in this unique protec- 
tion system are particularly susceptible to cold. The wearer 
is therefore advised not to expose the vest to temperatures 
below 0° Centigrade. If exposed to frigid temperatures for as 
little as 15 minutes, the vest is destroyed. 

Model: Creshaldyne Industries Barabel Microbe Armor 
Type: Biological blast vest 


Illustrations by Robert Duchlinski 


Fantastic Technology 


85 


Cost: 30,000 

Availability: 4 

Game Effect: Vest initially gives +1D to resist damage from blaster 
attacks to front and back torso. With each subsequent hit by a 
blaster bolt, the vest goes up by one pip (« 1D, +1D+1, +1D+2, «2D, 
etc.) up to a maximum of «3D. The vest drops by one pip for every 
three minutes the vest is not hit by a blast. If a blast penetrates the 
vest enough to allow the user to be wounded, the vest is destroyed. 


m CHESTRASHI VOID SPEAR 


The void spear is a biological construct characteristic of 
the ruthless Chestrashi (a species with a particularly nasty 
love of biological warfare). Available in extremely limited 
quantities, the one-of-a-kind weapon is a 2-meter long metal 
spear with a hollow center. Upon striking the intended 
victim, the spear tip breaks down, releasing thousands of 
microbes that attack the bone and central nervous systems. 
The result is a rapid debilitation that far exceeds the initial 
damage caused by impact with the weapon itself. 

Model: Charendohl Exports, Limited Chestrashi Void Spear 
Scale: Character 

Skill: Thrown weapons: spear 

Cost: 5,000 

Availability: 4, F, R or X 

Ammo: 5 (biological injections only) 

Difficulty: Moderate 

Damage: STR+1D plus special 


86 


Game Notes: Following a successful strike in which the victim is 
stunned or worse, the victim must make a Difficult stamina roll once 
every five minutes to resist the effect of the biological assault. Ifthe 
stamina roll fails, the user must resist a 6D damage roll (the effect 
of the biological weapon). The biological weapon is counteracted 
by exposure to high electromagnetic fields or the injection of small 
amounts of radioactive trace elements into the bloodstream. 


i COLUMI MENTAL HOVERPOD 


Experts at the art of developing machines that can obey 
mental commands, the Columi developed a mental hoverpod 
that can be directed by non-Columi. While cerebral incom- 
patibilities between other species slowed the development 
of this technology, recent scientific breakthroughs have 
enabled engineers to adapt these devices to the brainwaves 
of Humans, Hutts, Duros, Sullustans and Bith; future devel- 
opments should enable a far larger number of species to use 
these units. 


The Columi hoverpod looks like a floating metal chair 
that encases the lower half of the body. Movement and 
vertical lift are controlled by mental commands and the unit 
is powered by a standard fusion power generator. 

Craft: Columi Mental Hoverpad 

Type: Personal conveyance 

Scale: Character 

Length: 3 meters 

Skill: Hover vehicle operation 

Crew: 1 

Cargo Capacity: 50 kilograms 

Cover: 1/2 

Altitude Range: Ground level-3 meters 

Cost: 15,000 

Availability: 4, R 

Maneuverability: 1D 

Move: 30; 120 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D 

Game Notes: While existing stabilizing serums assist users in 
controlling this unit, some beings can experience bouts of nausea 
and other unpleasant side effects. A user must make a Difficult 
stamina check every half hour; failing the roll means the user will 
have to stop using the device for 1D hours. 


Fantastic Technology 


FINANCIAL OPPORTUNITY 


It should come as no surprise that the Hutts are 
taking a particularly keen interest in this new form 
of personal conveyance. Distribution franchises to 
Hutt worlds are available now! With minimal cost 
and licensing fees, a large return on your initial 
investment is possible. Both standard and luxury 
models custom-designed to meet Hutt specifica- 
tions are available. Contact your local Galladinium 
representative today for more information on this 
special opportunity. 


m DUROS BIO-COMPUTER 
The Duros bio-computer is a high-performance, per- 
sonal computer that successfully integrates biological ele- 
ments replicating what would otherwise be standard func- 
tions carried out by electrical components. The Duros bio- 
computer uses microscopic life-forms in a fluid culture mix 
that reacts to electrical impulses; the result is a living means 
of mass data storage. Power is derived from another series 
of biological entities that mimic photo-synthesis. Hybrid 
organic compounds in a liquid-display unit feed off this 
photosynthetic process, providing for data imaging in both 
two dimensional and holographic formats. Actual data pro- 
cessing is accomplished through composite bio-chemical 
fiber that can store encoded instructions by modifying 

specific protein combinations. 


While considerably larger than the average personal 
computer, the Duros bio-computer offers a maintenance- 
free performance standard with virtual independence from 
any external power source. 

Model: MerenData Duros Bio-Comp 1000 
Type: Biological personal computer 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 35,000 

Availability: 4 


m IMPLANT COMMUNICATOR 
Jabot watched as his partner, Dereth, nervously eyed his 
opponent from beyond the ornamental guide rails that 
separated the spectators from the last remaining players. 
Resisting the urge to acknowledge his partner’s presence, 
Jabot focused instead on the person seated across from 
him. Merex’s open sneer conveyed his contempt for Jabot; 


Fantastic Technology 


GALLADINIUM E 


their rivalry had been quite “healthy” over the years. 

"I think you're bluffing, Jabot.” 

"Well, I guess you'll just have to pay to find out, Merex. 
Card?" 

"One." 

"That all?” 

Jabot concentrated, "thinking" aloud in his mind. Okay 
Dereth, what's he got? 


From behind the velvet ropeguards, a nondescript alien 
in a green jumpsuit squinted hard against the bright lights. 
Despite the distance, Dereth could see Merex's cards with 
crystal clarity. His felinoid slit pupils widened in astonish- 
ment, his thoughts echoing his amazement. 

He's got garbage, Jabot! Two low-grade power cards, a 
scout, one knight and a lone baron — he's got nothing! 

Jabot looked at his own hand: three trusty knights sup- 
porting a baron and baroness. He waited until Merex added 
the latest circular card to his hand. Soundlessly he queried 
his partner a second time. 

And now? 

An equally soundless reply from across the room was 
forthcoming. He ditched a power card and got — zip — 
another power card. Still trash! 

Thank you, Dereth. You'd best leave the area now to avoid 
arousing any suspicion. This will be over soon enough. 

"Well, Jabot?" Merex was getting anxious, posing as if he 
was going to make a big kill. 

"Let's make this sporting, Merex. I wager 10,000 credits." 

Show off! echoed in the back of his brain 

Hush, Dereth. 

"You're bluffing, Jabot. But PH show you who'sthe better 
Helcos player. I'll match your wager and FH triple it." 

Dereth was already on his way out, but couldn't help 
sending one last, triumphal comment into his partner's 
head. He s totally bluffing, Jabot! You've got him! We'll have 
enough to get our ship back! 

We will, assuming you stop shouting long enough for me to 
finish him off! Okay, so you were right about the implants after 
all. But I still say I it gives me a splitting headache. 

So, [ll buy you a pharmaceutical production plant with my 
share of the take, Jabot! 

Fine Derleth, fine. Now off with you! 

Jabot had to admit he was goingto enjoy what came next. 

“I must acknowledge, Merex, you are indeed a good 
player. However, my Borlorian friend ..." Jabot paused, his 
webbed hands already extended to rake in his winnings, "... 


87 


B^ Bo 


I’m afraid this time, not good enough." 

With that, Jabot laid down his cards and began scooping 
up his earnings. Glasses around the room shattered as the 
Borlorian howled his discontent to the universe at large. 


Recent advances in communications technology have 
redefined how personal access to information may be 
handled in the years to come. One possible avenue of 
approach is the use of personal communication implants. 
Small transmitters (averaging approximately 10 millime- 
ters in diameter) are implanted for sub-vocalized transmis- 
sion; mastoid process receivers are used to intercept broad- 
casts from a matching transmitter (in Humans; of course, 
receivers will be placed in appropriate locations for aliens). 

Once in place, a transceiver relay picks up coded fre- 
quency transmissions and converts them into electrical 
impulses that are perceived by the brain as “voices in one’s 
head.” Likewise, sub-vocalized sentences can be broadcast 
with the user merely “thinking aloud.” 

Transmission frequences can include normal electro- 
magnetic carrier waves, digital microwave transmissions 
and specially coded ultrawave linkages for automatic busi- 
ness datafeeds. Safe and dependable, the implant can re- 
main in place for several standard years without removal 
for maintenance or replacement. 

Model: Traxes BioElectronics Implant Communicator 

Type: Implant personal communications unit 

Cost: 12,500 (operation costs and license requirements will vary) 
Availability: 4, F, R or X 

Game Notes: Maximum broadcast range is 1 kilometer. 


DID YOU NOT HEAR THE ONE 
ABOUT... 


Implant communication was originally intended 
for use in situations where conventional modes of 
communication were impractical (i.e., underground 
mining operations or as an emergency back-up 
system for ship repair personnel). While acknowl- 
edging these obvious and legitimate applications, 
this particular technology is ideal for use in any 
situation involving clandestine operations — espe- 
cially espionage activities! Such silent communica- 
tion (traceable only by appropriate communica- 
tions monitoring gear) makes for some interesting 
possibilities — at least until the authorities figure 
out what is going on and start broadcasting heavy 
jamming signals on appropriate frequency band- 
widths! Woe to the operative who is a victim to 
jamming, since she'll suffer a high-pitched, high- 
volume, piercing blast and no way to turn it off — 
a "splitting" headache indeed! 


m MON CALAMARI AQUATIC COMPUTER 


Unlike standard computer designs designed for dry cli- 
mates, the Mon Calamari aquatic computer is specifically 
designed for use in a liquid environment. This self-con- 
tained unit incorporates rare mineral elements found in the 
Calamari seas that interact with the salinity of the water to 
induce electrical generation. The computer requires no 
external power source. Other, non-corrosive elements na- 
tive to this world are used to construct all internal circuitry 
and exterior input systems. The display module incorpo- 


rates organic microorganisms that react to electric stimula- 
tion, providing detailed, full-spectrum displays up to 200 
meters deep. Calamari crystalline structures are also used 
as external data receptors. 

Prized not only for its functionality on water worlds, the 
Mon Calamari aquatic computer is also viewed as a work of 
art in its own right. It will no doubt become a prized 
collectible for those who enjoy exotic technology. 

Model: Kee-Piru Computronics ACCA-1dx000 
Type: Aquatic environment computer 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 8,000 

Availability: 4 


rF 


rr 


@) "amma "@; 
=< 


Game Notes: Internal battery cell allows for continued use out of 
water up to 10 standard hours. As an advanced portable computer 
with powerful artificial intelligence modules, this computer adds 
+1D to the user's computer programming/repair rolls. 


gm PERSONAL COMBAT THREAT ANALYZER 


Imagine this situation: someone — you don't know who, 
you don't know where — has just taken a blaster pot-shot at 
you. While blasted plasticrete masonry crumbles to the 
ground half a meter away, you hunker down in a shallow 
doorway, peering into the darkness, knowing someone out 
there definitely doesn't like you. 

Problem is, you have no idea where the attacker is 
located or where the next attack will come from. You hear 
thesounds of movement, but you can't pinpoint the source. 
What to do? 


88 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI. 


Pull out your personal combat threat analyzer (PCTA) 
and scan the area. The PCTA is a customized scanning 
device with a dedicated function: to identify the location of 
potential attackers, determine the number and types of 
weapons that are being used, evaluate the situation and 
suggest where the next attack will most likely come from. 
While not a substitute for a few good bodyguards, this 
device can give you a fighting chance. 

Model: Golan Persona! Combat Threat Analyzer 

Cost: 4,500 

Availability: 4 

Game Notes: This device provides a +1D bonus to tactics or search 
rolls pertaining to a specific combat situation. The gamemaster can 
use this device to give characters hints about a given combat 
situation without having to divulge all the facts pertaining to the 
situation: the results are given as a percentage probably of a certain 
attack’s type, origin and predicted future action. 


I KNOW THEY'RE OUT THERE 
SOMEWHERE ... 


Some ofthe best examples of technology arethe 
ones the gamemaster can get involved with! [n the 
case of the PCTA, the gamemaster must decide if a 
given situation warrants all the credits the charac- 
ters invested in the device in the first place. There 
is no wayforthe PCTA to be 10076 accurate —there 
are just too many variables involved. The device is 
programmed to estimate the most likely avenue of 
attack, based on available data, and relay informa- 
tion about the number of opponents, types of 
weapons detected, relative cover on hand, and 
whether an attack can be made from differing 
height locations and so forth. 

In many cases, simple readouts (like a direc- 
tional indicator flashing on a simple scale map of 
the area) will be available to the user, and these will 
typically only be correct about 70-80% of the time. 

While not inhibited by climate or vision con- 
straints, be advised that the PCTA works best when 
the assailants are stationary. If too many people 
are moving around, the PCTA simply cannot pro- 
cess all the variables fast enough. In such cases, the 
gamemaster should present the characters with a 
very frustrating, “Working ... working ... working 
... message and nothing else! 

This is a nice device that can be used to give 
characters a much needed edge (especially inexpe- 
rienced characters!) or get them out of a tough 
scrape once in awhile. Should they rely on it too 
often, they will quickly discover there is no substi- 
tute for good intuition! 


m REPULSOR RODIAN THROWING-RAZOR 


A favorite of Rodian bounty hunters, this weapon is now 
available to Galladinium's select clintele. Each throwing- 
razor has a serrated blade opposite the handle. 

Each throwing-razor is balanced and has a micro- 
repulsorlift motor; the throwing-razor also has a small 
homing beacon for automatic retrieval. 

The homing signal originates from a homing transpon- 


Fantastic Technology 


der (normally worn on the user's belt or clipped to a tunic) 
and is coded to the owner's genetic pattern (prior to use, a 
genetic sample, such as a skin sample, is loaded into the 
homing unit). This system means the weapon can only be 
used by the owner. 

The weapon is simply thrown by the attacker. While the 
repulsorlift motors enhance the range and angle of curve, 
the user's throw is vital for attack accuracy and range. The 
owner can activate an auto retrieval stud on the homing 
transponder, activating the throwing-razor's motors and 
retrieving it for the owner. 


Model: Rheshalva Interstellar Armaments Repulsor Rodian Throw- 
ing-Razor 

Type: Thrown weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Thrown weapons: Rodian throwing-razor 

Cost: 3,000 (pair) 

Availability: 4, F, R or X 

Range: 25-50/150/300 

Damage: STR+1D+2 

Game Notes: After initial attack, victim must make a Difficult 
stamina roll for three minutes to avoid 3D additional damage due 
to excessive blood loss. 


iB SQUIB TENSOR RIFLE 


As acknowledged masters of tractor beam technology, it 
is not unusual to find Squib-constructed weapons based on 
that technology. The Squib tensor rifle uses a rapid series of 
compressed tractor beam waves to strike a target with a 
near-continuous bombardment of tractor energy, resulting 
in cell disruption. The beam is invisible, but extremely loud. 


89 


Model: Amberlandrax Armaments Squib Tensor Rifle 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Tensor weapons: rifle 

Ammo: 50 with replaceable power generator 

Cost: 15,000 

Availability: 4, F, Ror X 

Range: 25-75/150/250 

Damage: 4D 

Game Notes: The tensor rifle does 3D damage for the first hit; 
subsequent hits to the same target within 30 seconds cause in- 
creasing damage: 4D for the second hit, 5D for thethird, etc. Dueto 
the great difficulty of targeting and handling this rather bizarre 
weapon, double the normal penalty for multiple actions in a round 
(two actions would be a -2D penalty; three actions would be a -4D 
penalty, four actions would be a -6D penalty, etc.) 


i SUN JAMMER 


Sun jammers have enjoyed a resurgence in recent years, 
both as racing ships and recreational vehicles. The use of 
these solar wind-driven craft harkens back to an earlier age 
of exploration. For the adventurous, a sun jammer is a great 
way to pit one's ingenuity against nature. For others, sun 
jamming is an excellent way to match one's skills against 
other enthusiastic competitors. Even spectators can enjoy 
thegrand spectacle of jammers racing across system space, 
suchas is found at the annual Chandrilan Cometary Games. 

See for yourself what the flap's all about. Chances are 
you'll be hooked! 


Craft: Modified Starshipwrights and Aerospace Engineers Incorpo- 
rated (SAET) Sun Skipper 2000 Sun Jammer 
Type: Sun jammer 
Length: 1,000 meters wide (solar collector dish), 450 meters long 
(command pylon) 
Scale: Starfighter 
Skill: Archaic starship piloting: sun jammer 
Crew: 2 
Crew Skill: Varies widely 
Passengers: 1 
Cargo Capacity: 300 kilograms 
Consumables: 1 week 
Cost: 250,000 (new); 150,000 (used) 
Availability: 4 
Maneuverability: +1 
Space: 2 
Hull: 1D (command pylon), 0D (solar collector) 
Sensors: 
Passive: 35/0D 


90 


E GALL 40INIUM B41. ADINIUE 


RACING FOR FUN AND 
[ILLEGAL] PROFIT ... 


Sun jammer races are becoming an increasingly 
popular source of entertainment, especially in the 
wealthier and heavily populated regions of the 
Empire. 

While the ships are expensive, maintenance is 
simple, making them ideal for hobbyists or those in 
outlying systems where spare parts are likely to be 
in short supply. 

This rise in popularity has paralleled the in- 
crease in betting on sun jammer competitions. This 
increase has not gone unnoticed by criminal ele- 
ments, who have found a way to “modify” race 
results for their financial benefit. 

Any potential adventure surrounding corrupt 
officials, money-laundering activities, fixed gam- 
bling events, or similar situations can involve sun 
jammer racing. 

Operating under the principle that the best way 
to hide something is out in the open, some sun 
jammers have begun smuggling contraband goods 
into heavily patrolled areas — who would suspect 
a sun jammer of being a smuggling vessel? 


m TRANTHEBAR RACING HARNESS 


The air was alive! In his mind's eye, Joraaz could see the 
avian's telescopic view of the mountain ahead. His brain 
tingled with the beast's eagerness; the anticipation he felt 
was shared by his mount. 

A shadow fell on his left wrist, signaling impending 
danger. Almost too late, Joraaz swerved down and to the 
right. Scant meters away, the massive outline of another 
red- and blue-feathered mount swerved left. Joraaz noted 
that the beast's talons had been extended. As anger rose 
inside him, his own mount screamed a matching cry of 
anger; he felt the creature projecting a desire for revenge. 


All right, Mithran, if that's the way you want to play it ... 

Joraaz projected his thoughts toward the great beast 
beneath him. With an anticipation that rivaled his own, the 
creature lunged up and after the attacker. 

Frehjak, don't try to get above him. He'll be expecting that. 
Stay below him. lve got an idea. 

Joraaz's tranthebar bucked the wind currents to slowly 


Fantastic Technology 


GAL. 


cross the meters to the other tranthebar and her rider. With 
the sun behind them, Joraaz knew he might be able to 
approach undetected. 

Any minute now, Joraaz expected to see Mithran spot 
him and end this grudge race once and for all. But luck, and 
the sun, was with Joraaz and his tranthebar mount Frehjak 
that morning. 

Joraaz maneuvered the giant avian underneath his 
enemy’s own mount. One final sacrifice, he thought to his 
mount. In response to his silent request, Frehjak tossed his 
head once. Smiling his thanks, Joraaz bent down and plucked 
a single fresh feather from just below the fourth harness 
strap. 

Careful to avoid the other avian’s huge talons, which 
could rip him apart with a single swipe, Joraaz reached up 
to the one vulnerable spot on his enemy’s mount. 

Tickle, tickle, tickle! 

A sharp plummet narrowly saved Joraaz from the 
creature’s reflex swipe with its claws. As he leveled out, 
Joraaz smiled to himself as he watched Mithran fighting to 
regain control, his mount in an ungainly tailspin as it clawed 
at itself to be rid of an unseen irritant. 

It doesn’t matter if you win or lose ... better luck next time, 
Mithran! 


Lovers of exquisite avian tranthebar racers will be pleased 
to hear that now they can ownacybernetic control harness, 
just like those used in tranthebar races. While the sport is 
certainly not for everyone, you're not just anyone, are you? 
While you might not be ready to become a professional 
ridertomorrow,there's nodisputingthatasingletranthebar 
race is the thrill of a lifetime! So what are you waiting for? 
Experience the majesty and the blood-pounding surge of 
excitement! 


Disclaimer: Before purchasing a tranthebar control net, 
itis advised that all potential riders receive full physical and 
mental examinations toinsurethey can withstandthe stress 
of tranthebar flights. Mishaps occur even among experi- 
enced riders. Amateur racers are required to undertake a 
four week training program before certification as an ama- 
teur racer is issued. Consult the Tranthellix Commerce and 
Travel Bureau nearest you for more information. 

Model: Leisure Mechanicals TRHA-300 Control Harness 

Type: Cybernetic avian symbiotic control harness 

Skill: Beast riding: tranthebar 

Cost: 12,500; the tranthebar, training fees, and registration fees are 
separate 

Availability: 4, F 

Game Notes: Adds «2D to the user's beast riding: tranthebar skill. 
The TRHA control harness isaseries of external cyber-attachments 
that links the minds of the tranthebar mountain ripper and the 
rider, allowing them to share emotions and exchange thoughts. 


m TRANTHEBAR MOUNTAIN RIPPER 


Type: Avian predator 

DEXTERITY 3D 

PERCEPTION 1D+2 

Search 6D, sneak 5D 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Stamina 4D 

Special Abilities: 

Beak: Beak does STR+1D+2 damage 

Vision. Rippers have exceptional vision and can spot an object as 
small as 10 centimeters from a distance of 200 meters (this is 
reflected in their search skill) 

Silent Movement: Rippers glide with minimal noise, riding mountain 
thermal currents to their advantage. 


Fantastic Technology 


Speed. Rippers can make dives at speeds approaching 200 kilome- 
ters per hour 

Talons: Talons do STR+2D damage 

Move: 40 (flying), 70 (diving) 

Size: 2.2-2.8 meters tall at the shoulder, up to 5-meter wingspan 
Orneriness: 5D 


Capsule: Tranthebar mountain rippers are large avians; 
solitary predators with a taste for flesh, they are intelligent 
and cunning. They have never been completely domesti- 
cated, although some raised from hatchlings by humanoids 
have been known to submit to riders for extended periods 
of time. However, these creatures can never be completely 
trusted, and stories abound of tranthebars turning on their 
riders or keepers. Atranthebar invariably reverts to its wild 
form and even the most domesticated of beasts has to 
eventually be released into the wild. 

Tranthebar racing is a relatively new sport which is 
becoming popular in certain regions of the Core (thanks to 
live HoloNet broadcasts). Currently, tranthebar races are 
restricted to the mountains of Tranthellix, the creature’s 
homeworld. Tranthellix has strict export regulations re- 
garding the animals and it is expected the government will 
never allow a sizeable number of tranthebars to be shipped 
off-world. 


m VERPINE SHATTER GUN 


The Verpine shatter gun is built around a miniature and 
highly advanced magnetic coil. Miniature alloy projectiles 
are accelerated through the coils, dramatically increasing 
their velocity. The result is a virtually soundless weapon 
that produces kinetic damage far out of proportion to the 
size of the ammunition being used. 

The drawbacks to this remarkable invention are its cost 
and the delicacy ofthe weapon's components. This special- 
ized weapon is especially vulnerable to breakdown if not 
handled correctly. Still, inthe right hands it is adevastatingly 
powerful weapon with a very long effective range. 


= 
c — m 


| 


91 


~ GALL AaINIUM 


Model: Verpine Shatter Gun 

Type: Magnetic accelerator weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Firearms: Verpine shatter gun 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 30,000, 1,000 (ammo) 

Availability: 4, F, R or X 

Body: 1D 

Range: 50-400/900/1.5 km 

Damage: 6D 

Game Notes: If the shatter gun is jarred, dropped or otherwise 
banged in any significant manner, roll damage against the weapon's 
body. 


m MAGNAFORCE SECURITY SHIELD 


One answer to today's crime problem is Simcronic's 
newest development, the MagnaForce security shield sys- 
tem. Sold in pairs, this wrist-worn defense system generates 
a localized defensive field capable of stopping low to me- 
dium power blaster bolts. Miniature defensive force field 
systems remain extremely expensive, but they are a suit- 
able last-ditch defense. 

Model: Simcronics MagnaForce Security Shield 
Type: Personal defensive field generator 

Skill: Melee parry 

Cost: 25,000 pair, 2,500 (custom power cells) 
Availability: 4, F, Ror X 


92 


Game Notes: This unit is used much like starship shields, except 
that it is character scale. Initial activation requires an Easy melee 
parry roll, which generates a round shield 50 centimeters in diam- 
eter. A character may make a melee parry round — if the roll is 
higher than the firer's blaster roll (as per normal shield rolls), the 
wearer has placed the force shield in the way. If the roll is lower than 
the attacker’s blaster roll, the character didn’t get the shield in 
place in time and was hit by the blast. If the defender got the shield 
in place, the blaster bolt must roll against the shield’s defensive 
field of 4D to see if it penetrates the field (use the protection rules 
on page 63 of Star Wars, Second Edition). Any further damage affects 
the target as indicated in the chart “Cover Modifiers.” The power 
cell will work for two minutes before being drained. 


Fantastic Technology 


GAL. I. ADINIUM 


NUN—c ATAI ua 
ul FERINGS 


The following items are not part of the Galladinium Current Hyperdrive New Hyperdrive 
catalog, but are included here because of their adven- Multiplier Multiplier 
ture potential. Theitems might be unique (and therefore x10. x4 
extremely expensive or not available for sale) or so x0-x6 x 
restricted that only the most elite military installations 
might have them. Characters captured by the Empire X5-x3 x2 
with these items in their possession could face a life x2 xl 
sentence on Kessel. xl x1/2 


Characters interested in acquiri 
vices would have to go through an 
tures to have any hope of success. 
encouraged to make the characte 5 


he following de- 
mber of adven- . 
gamemaster is 


"oll is unsuccessful, roll a catastrophic 
s hyperdrive (which happens immedi- 
the hyperdrive is used, depending 
er is also ruined. 

ise. In addition to the mishap 
die. If the number rolled is less 
compressor has been used, 
uts down and has suffered a 
cult repair roll to get operat- 


This is a dangerously experim 
creasesahyperdrive's speed byforc 
the engine than would normally be à 
the booster helps moderate the eng gin 


i Game Notes: Reduces a ship's hyperdrive as noted, but risks a 
sev y h failure. Roll for a hyperdrive mishap as de- 


à Édition; with a ? mishap moditier. Works only on freighters with a 
100 metric ton cargo capacity or less. 
Design: Dennis F. Belanger (7th place) 


i NAV COMPUTER BYPASS 
Has this ever happened to you? You're zipping through 


hyperdrive engine and once a boostéf has ‘been activated, 
it cannot be reconfigured for a different engine. If a pilot 
attempts any further hyperdrive modifications after attach- 
ing a hyperdrive booster, double all mishap modifiers (or, 
at the gamemaster’s discretion, a truly catastrophic failure 


of some kind happens). 
If the installation roll is successful, the ship's hyperdrive 
multiplier is reduced as follows: 


Fantastic Technology 


hyperspace and everything is running smoothly. Then, that 
mysterious passenger that paid you 10,000 credits to bring 
her to Dantooine "no questions asked" says she's changed 
her mind and wants to go to Ord Mantell. She will pay you 
another 20,000 credits if she arrives by tommorow. 

You explain to her that you just can't throw the brakes on 
and turn around. Dropping out of hyperspace and getting a 
fix on the ship's current position will add hours to the trip, 
not to mention calculating and traversing a probably un- 
charted route. 

"No way, sweetheart," you say with a frown. "This ship is 
fast and I’m the best freighter pilot you've ever seen, but you 
just can't change the laws of hyperspace physics." 

With a cold sneer she produces a heavy blaster pistol. 
"That's your problem ... sweetheart. " 


To stay on the cutting edge of galactic technology (and 


Illustrations by Robert Duchlinski 


93 


~ J| GALL ANINIUM 


your business), you have to take chances. The Nav Com- 
puter Route Astrogation Bypass (or N-CRAB) is a tool that 
can help make those chances less risky. 

Simply put, the N-CRAB duplicates the computation of 
your existing nav computer and configures a new route 
based on your original destination. When a pre-determined 
point in your jump is reached, the N-CRAB begins to inte- 
grate the new route over the old one in your ship's nav 
computer. The result is a smooth transition to a new route 
without the need to exit hyperspace. 

Model: Kuat Drive Yards Nav Computer Route Astrogation Bypass 
Type: Prototype navigation computer bypass 

Skill: Astrogation 

Cost: Not available for sale 

Availability: 4, X 


Game Notes: Using the Nav-Computer Route Astrogation Bypass 
(N-CRAB) requires three astrogation rolls. The first is programming 
into the N-CRAB a duplicate of the original course (one difficulty 
level lower than the original course difficulty). The second rollisto 
chart a course from an upcoming point in the course to the new 
destination (the difficulty can vary dramatically, from Very Easy to 
Heroic). The final roll is to properly feed the course through the N- 
CRAB into the nav computer (this roll is one difficulty level lower 
than the second roll). 

Missing the first or second roll simply means that the N-CRAB will 
not function. Failing the third roll by any amount causes a mishap 
as described on page 111 of Star Wars, Second Edition. 

The whole programming procedure takes one-tenth the time of the 
new hyperspace travel route. 

Unfortunately, the N-CRAB has atendency to interfere with a ship's 
nav computer. The nav computer must be "cleaned" via program- 
ming (a Moderate astrogation or computer programming/repair 
roll). For a second use of the N-CRAB without cleaning a/lastrogation 
difficulties are one difficulty level higher. For the third use, all 
difficulties are two levels higher. Additional uses incur higher 
penalties (difficulties above Heroic are rated as Heroic+10, He- 
roic+20, Heroic+30 and so forth). 

Design: Dennis F. Belanger (14th place) 


94 


DROIDS 


æ SB-20 SECURITY BREACH DROID 


Similar to MerenData's espionage droids, “Illicit Elec- 
tronics" has modified ordinary Industrial Automaton R- 
series droids (particularly R1 and R2 units). They have 
retained the unit's original shell (so the droids appear to be 
ordinary units), but highly illegal espionage and encryp- 
tion/decryption gear and programming has been added. As 
one might suspect, Illicit is an underground company and 
has marketed the units quietly and only to select "organiza- 
tions" with similarly shadowy backgrounds. 

The SB-20, due to its nondescript appearance, can gener- 
ally get easy access to sensitive computers. With its com- 
puter skills, it excels at slicing through systems to retrieve 
the data it was sent for with very little chance of detection. 
After its job is completed, the droid can just roll right 
through security checkpoints, merrily tweeting away ... 

Although illegal throughout the Empire, Imperial Intelli- 
gence has gotten its hands on a few SB-20s for its own uses. 
It is known that an SB-20 was vital in the retrieval of 
information prior to the Empire's attack on the Rebel base 
at Pkihantri. 


Type: Illicit Electronics SB-20 Slicer Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

Communications 5D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Forgery 4D 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Computer programming/repair 7D, security 5D 


Fantastic Technology 


Equippped With: 

* Three wheeled legs (one retractable) 

* Retractable heavy grasper arm (lifting skill at 2D) 

* Retractable fine work grasper arm 

* Extendable 0.3-meter-long video sense (360? rotation) 
e Small electric arc welder, 1D to 5D damage (as fits the situation), 
0.3-meter range 

e Small circular saw (4D damage, 0.3-meter range) 

e Video display screen 

* Holographic projector/recorder 

* Fire extinguisher 

e Small (20 cm by 8 cm) internal “cargo” area 

e CodeRifter Encryption Equipment 

e SecurityViolator security programming 

Move: 5 

Size: 1 meter tall 

Cost: 12,000 

Availability: 4, X 

Design: Mike Kogge (16th place) 


m RLG GUARDIAN DROID SYSTEM 


The RLG guardian droid is referred to as a system be- 
cause it is acutally two droids. By using two identical units, 
the system provides constant protection. There are many 
beings in the galaxy who feel that a droid is superior to a 
living bodyguard: the RLG was created to prove that. The 
RLG's attention never falters, nor can its loyalty be swayed 
by bribes or even the prospect of its own destruction. The 
RLGis perfect for situations where a cumbersome, full-sized 
mechanical bodyguard is unsuitable. 


neh tt aa 
a 
EMEN — EMEN, 


:(———ss Qo ——— ed 


To use the system, a small pouch is worn around the 
waist. It holds one of the droids in a recharging unit. The 
other droid uses its repulsorlift unit to hover around its 
master. Its sensor package covers the visual, infrared and 
ultraviolet range, with a full motion package. Its program- 
ming includes specific information to detect ambushes, 
hidden weapons and suspect behavior, and it can be pro- 
grammed to recognize specific threats, such as certain 
individuals. If a threat to its master is detected, the droid 
sounds an alarm and, if given permission by its master, 
attacks with its blaster. If its master is injured, the droid 
moves as close as possible to the attacker and self-de- 
structs. The droid's power cell is good for 12 hours of 
continuous operation, but the droids are supposed to be 
exchanged every 10 hours to prevent the droid from run- 
ning critically short of energy; recharging the droid takes 
two hours. The droid's recharging unit must itself be re- 
charged from a power generator at least once a week; 
recharging takes 12 hours. Both droids can be activated 
simultaneously if necessary. 

For an extra 300 credits, the user can get a remote unit, 
allowing the user to control the droid and its sensors up to 
500 meters away; the droids visual and audio sensors 
broadcast to the remote, allowing the user to see and hear 


Fantastic Technology 


DAI. 


LAiNINILIM Bi 


what the droid sees and hears. In this way, the droid can be 
used as a forward scout. 

While the RLG was intended for legitimate purposes, it 
has found its way into many criminal circles. Many 
crimelords, knowing enough not to trust their hired hands, 
have begun using RLGs as a last line of personal defense. 
Type: Arakyd RLG Guardian Droid System 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Tactics 2D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
Sensors 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 4D 
STRENGTH 1D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Equippped With: 

e Internal blaster pistol (4D damage, range 0-5/15/25) 

e Repulsorlift drive unit 

e FullSpec sensor package (passive: 25/0D, scan: 35/1D; search: 40/ 
1D+2; focus: 3/2D+2) 

e Self-destruct mechanism (8D, 0-2; 6D, 3-4; 4D, 5-6; 2D, 7-9) 
Move: 10 

Size: 15 centimeters tall 

Cost: 3,000 (new), 1,000 (used), 300 (remote unit) 

Availability: 3, F, Ror X 

Design: Jim Tews (honorable mention) 


m FLESH CAMOUFLAGE 


This is an advanced disguise system. The computer for 
this disguise kit can only be programmed by programmers 
who know the parameters of the security system to be 
infiltrated and have a complete computerized record of the 
individual's retina, fingerprint and genetic scans. With this 
computer information the specialized computer will pro- 
duce: 


Retinal Contacts: These will produce thin plasticized 
membranes which replicate the retina pattern of the target 
to be impersonated. 


Chemical Security Card (SecCard): This will store 10 
image sheets, which can contain pictures, text information 
or identification with proper code sequences. The SecCard 
has no electronic parts. To changeto the next identification 
screen, one presses the "advance" button. Once an image 


95 


B^ BE 


sheet is used the information cannot be retrieved. 


Flesh Disguise: These are replicas of the face, hands, and 
feet of another person. Once fitted into place, the replica- 
tions are extremely effective at a distance. The mouth ofthe 
disguise has a small electronic link to modity the pitch and 
tone of the voice (if the recorded voice is available). 


Theoperator must make a computer programming/repair 
roll. 


Roll Result 

Very Easy Contacts, SecCard and flesh are all 
unusuable 

Easy Contacts: +2 to security for retinal 
scans 


SecCard: +2 to security for card scans 
Flesh: +2 to con. 


Moderate Contacts: +1D to security for retinal 
scans 
SecCard: +1D to security for card scans 


Flesh: +1D to con. 


Difficult 


Contacts: +1D+2 to security for retinal 
scans 
SecCard: +1D+2 to security for card 
scans 
Flesh: +1D+2 to con. 


Very Contacts: +2D to security for retinal Difficult 
scans 
SecCards: +2D to security for card 
scans 
Flesh: +2D to con. 


Heroic Contacts: +3D to security for retinal 
scans 
SecCards: +3D to security for card 
scans 
Flesh: +3D to con. 


Model: Illicit Electronics Flesh Camouflage 

Type: Personal disguise device 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 11,000 (computer), 500 (per retinal contact pair; non-reus- 
able), 500 (per SecCard taker), 250 (per flesh concealment kit, non- 
reusable) 

Availability: 4, X 

Design: Mike Kogge (6th place) 


E E eS O O OILOZEÉ£ÉSÉSO—)!!7XO|)UIN.2" S C | 


96 Fantastic Technology 


GA NIUM’S 


(SSC aa RE 
E Rick D. Stuart 


Additional material by various authors 


md e venturin B ge 1gh-and- 
^ncounters. With s detailing weapons, 


micro-electronics, s gear, droids and 
KS E 
Gall 's catal og of wares 


medical supplies, | 
dispensible to any p 


will prove to be i 
characters! 


c IIILII 


Shanan sas = ie 


Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. £ 


(9, TM & © 1995 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. "Y 
. 7T 


| : | zc ^ supplement for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaving Gam 
| ST Mio" 


Ln 


EU-87431-215-45 $15.00 


M LII 
pi 025 


88/4 40 


Y 


l 


