i A WARS 


SLAVE OF THE EMPIRE 


= 


GOROTH 


SLAVE OF THE EMPIRE 


by Nigel D. Findley 


——=s1 


— 


Dan & David Day 


Development and Editing: Bill Smith ¢ Graphics: Tim Bobko 
Cover Design: Tim Bobko, Stephen Crane *Ħ Cover Art: Lucasfilm Ltd. 
Interior Art: Dan and David Day, Mike Vilardi 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter « Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter 
Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran + Senior Editor: Greg Farshtey 
Editors: Miranda Horner, Peter Schweighofer, Bill Smith, Ed Stark Art Director: Stephen Crane 
Graphic Artists: Tim Bobko, Steve Brown, Tom ONeill, Brian Schomburg 
Sales Manager: Bill Olmesdahl Ħ Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden * Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill 
_Accounting: Karen Bayly, Wendy Lord, Kimberly Riccio + Billing: Amy Giacobbe 


Published by 


Vases 


RR 3 Box 2345 | 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40098 


®, TM and © 1995 Lucasfilm, Ltd (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Introduction 


Ee Introduction 


Today, looking back on the years of the Old 
Republic, before the emergence of the Empire, it 
is all too easy to see a halcyon era, the kind of 
unalloyed “Good Old Days” recalled by people 
distressed with the present and intimidated by 
the future. The galaxy was peaceful then. The 
quadrillions of sentient beings of the Republic 
enjoyed order and security through a kind of 
“Pax Galactica.” 

So most people believe, at least. Unfortunately 
—as is so often the case — the truth is somewhat 
less simple and less reassuring than the comfort- 
able fallacy. Yes, it is true that overall the galaxy 
was at peace during the millennia of the old 
Republic. 

The galaxy is vast, however, and historians 
are forced to adopt a galactic perspective if they 
want to make sense of it. On a galactic scale, the 
Republic era was one of peace. But, when one 
uses a galactic scale, it is all too easy to lose sight 
of “irrelevant” details — like individual systems. 
Small and isolated “brush-fire” wars sparked to 
life, burned for years or decades, then sputtered 
out. Semi-autonomous “provinces” strove with 
their neighbors for territory, resources and influ- 
ence; colony worlds rebelled, struggling to throw 
of the yoke of what they saw as oppression; 
traditional rivals and new enemies tried to settle 
with turbolasers and concussion missiles what 
could not be settled through diplomacy. 

Most of these outbreaks of violence were so 
small as to be unworthy of notice from a galactic 
perspective. What does one world, or one sys- 
tem, really matter among the millions of worlds 
in the Known Galaxy? 

Except to those caught up in these conflicts, of 
course. To historians and galactic political scien- 
tists, they matter not at all. To the victims, they 
matter a great deal. 


AR 
ARS 


The planet Goroth is one of those forgotten 
worlds unlucky enough to fall victim to an “unim- 
portant” war. More than four millennia ago, it 
was a rich prize coveted by both sides in a 
regional “border skirmish.” When the two sides 
realized that neither would be able to claim the 
resources of Goroth unchallenged, each came to 
the same terrible conclusion: if they could not 
have Goroth, then no one would. 

Four thousand years have passed. The two 
factions which fought over Goroth—and eventu- 
ally came to virtually destroy it — have vanished 
in the flood of history. The world of Goroth has 
managed to rise from its own ashes. Its inhabit- 
ants have begun to rebuild the civilization that 
was blasted back almost into the neolithic age. 

And now, once more, Goroth finds itself and its 
resources coveted by two foes: this time, the 
Empire and the Rebel Alliance. Goroth repre- 
sents a resource that each faction dearly wants, 
yet is unwilling to see possessed by its foe. 

Will Goroth again be caught between the ham- 
mer and the anvil of war? 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Welcome back to the Star Wars universe! 

Goroth: Slave of the Empire is asupplement for 
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition. 
It describes a new star system, and a new world, 
that has suddenly assumed surprising signifi- 
cance to both the Galactic Empire and the Rebel 
Alliance. 

This book includes all the information Star 
Wars gamemasters need to incorporate the 
Goroth system and its dominant species into 
their campaigns. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Goroth Prime 


Type: Arid volcanic wasteland 

Temperature: Hot 

Atmosphere: Type ll (breath mask suggested)/Type Ill (breath mask 
required) (variable; see below) 

Hydrosphere: Arid 

Gravity: Standard 

Terrain: Wastelands, volcanic mountains, deserts, shallow poi- 
soned oceans z 

Length of Day: 36 standard hours 

Length of Year: 300 local days 

Sapient Species: Gorothites (N), Humans 

Starports: 2 stellar class, 3 limited service 

Population: 500 million 

Planet Function: Hyperbaride mining, homeworld 

Government: Officially P’Dar'Ken (planetary council) but de facto 
Imperial Colonial Governor 

Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: Hyperbarides 

Major Imports: High technology, foodstuffs 

System: Goroth 

Star: Goroth Alpha (red-orange) 

Orbital Bodies: 
Name 

Oris 

Goroth Prime 
Denava 
Denbalen 
Goroth Beta 


Planet Type Moons 
nickel-iron terrestrial 0) 
arid volcanic wasteland 3 
gas giant 6 
gas giant 

brown dwarf 


Polar Cap 


Sp 32) MRA Lenba $ A Cava 
= OM ASA. 


: W KA 
ve Moren wy SA A 
ANAA 


(“Harrowmere") 


Western 


Hemisphere Polar Cap 


World Summary 


Goroth Prime — known to the Aqualish as “Celleballen” 
(“Wasteland”) — appears from space to be a blasted cinder 
of a world. It seems perpetually wrapped in thick, reddish- 
brown clouds that roil and churn. Titanic static discharges 
within the clouds are so brilliant that they can be seen from 
thousands of kilometers above the planet's surface. A tenu- 
ous ring — actually megatons of planetary crust blown into 
orbit by asteroid impacts four millennia ago — girdles the 
planet. 

Goroth Prime is a major source of hyperbarides (super- 
heavy stable elements) and is thus of great importance to 
both the Empire and the Rebel Alliance. Goroth Prime has 
been deemed to be a “protectorate-colony” — Imperial 
terminology for an annexed world —and the native sentients 
to be an “indigenous labor pool.” In other words, slaves. 

The Goroth system is so far off the normal hyperspace 
routes that it is expensive — even as the Empire measures 
such things — to maintain an adequate garrison and to 

ct the hyperbarides that make Goroth valuable. For 
this reason, the Empire has opened the world to the corpo- 
rate sphere. Currently, several major interstellar corpora- 
tions vie with each other to exploit the world, all the while 
trying to avoid bringing unwanted Imperial attention upon 
themselves. 


Polar Cap 


i$; : 
(“Firecomb Sean.» 
HPNA, 


SAN T'Klin S'Rek 


“Ulan Bighi 4 
Eastern ; 


Hemisphere Polar Cap 


Planet Log Terrain Key 


Volcanic Badlands Craters 
Mountains 


Volcano 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


[__] Water 


e City o 


+ Spaceport 


Hyperbaride 
Plant 


Introduction enn fees 


IPEA DWN 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—ST. 
-WA 


EE Chapter One 


History 


Each of the half-billion inhabitants of the world 
of Goroth knows that modern war is not the 
glamorous, exciting panorama one might come 
to expect from Imperial recruiting ads. Itis bloody, 
and lethal, and the wounds it causes are not 
limited to the combatants — or even to those 
who were alive, or whose parents were alive, 
when a particular battle took place. 

The world of Goroth is a relative newcomer 
among worlds that are home to sentient life. 
According to native xenobiologists, life arose on 
the planet Goroth more than five billion years 
ago, but remained primitive until “recently” (cos- 
mologically speaking, of course). The semi-sen- 
tient ancestors of today’s Gorothites emerged 
less thana million years ago, and true civilization 
gained a foothold on the world less than 10,000 
years ago. 

Gorothite civilization developed along lines 
common to many other species. From simple 
hunter-gatherer bands, the natives quickly dis- 
covered the value of agriculture. Small farming 
villages rapidly grew into burgeoning cities (al- 
though they maintained the structure of the farm- 
ing villages; these cities simply had much larger 
populations). Gorothite civilization advanced to 
the feudal level and then stopped. 

During this period, the planet of Goroth was 
almost astoundingly fertile, a temperate world 


rich in plants, animals and valuable resources. It _ 


was perfect for the development of a sentient 
species. The climate was benign, there were few 
predators, and food was abundant. The 
Gorothites quickly learned how to maximize their 
yields from agriculture and animal husbandry. 
To supplement their diets, they harvested the 
abundant fish and other forms of marine life that 
filled the warm, shallow oceans. Thus it is not 
surprising that the dominant religion of the time 
considered the world of Goroth to be a kind of 
“terrestrial paradise,” entry into which the 
Gorothites had earned through good deeds in 
previous incarnations. 

There was one “serpent” in this paradise—for 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


reasons that exogeologists have yet to fully un- 
derstand, the crust of Goroth has always con- 
tained a relatively high concentration of 
hyperbarides. “Relatively” is the key word here. 
At the time, concentrations of hyperbarides in 
the crust stood at levels of one part per quadril- 
lion. Still, in comparison to most terrestrial plan- 
ets — which contained no hyperbarides whatso- 
ever — these concentrations were abnormally 
high. The crust was also rich in various valuable 
heavy metals. 

Hyperbarides are cytotoxic agents — highly 
poisonous to life-forms whose metabolism is 
based on a carbon-oxygen chemical economy 
(and to certain other life-forms as well). Poison- 
ous, too, are most heavy metals. All forms of life 
on Goroth had evolved in the presence of trace 
quantities of hyperbarides and higher levels of 
heavy metals, however, and thus had an innate 
resistance to these elements’ poisonous charac- 
teristics. Thus, while the food crops that sus- 
tained the Gorothites would kill a Human over 
time, the natives were totally unaffected by these 
toxins. 


The Republic Era 


The Goroth system is located well off estab- 
lished hyperspace trade routes in the back-wa- 
ters of the Mid-Rim region of the galaxy, just 
within the boundaries of “The Slice.” Hyperspace 
travel in this region of space — labeled on star- 
maps as the Trans-Nebular Sector — is compli- 
cated by the presence of several nebulae. These 
facts combine to make it very unlikely that any 
starship would “stumble upon” the Goroth sys- 
tem by accident. Still, given enough time, even 
the longest of odds will eventually come up. 

That statistically unlikely discovery occurred 
some 8,000 years ago, when Corellian “traders” 
(pirates) blundered into the system. Once the 
Corellians were confident they had evaded the 
Republic customs frigate on their tail — the 
reason they had been jumping through this re- 


Chapter One: Histo 


Chapter One: Histo 


gion of space in the first place — they took the 
time to scan the system they had discovered. 
When they learned that the second planet of the 
system was home to a sentient species, they 
realized they had discovered something of im- 
mense value: a planet-sized market for the “trade 
goods” they carried aboard their vessel. 

For their part, the Gorothites were politely 
interested when the Corellian ship landed. While 
their technology was centuries away from allow- 
ing them to visit the other planets in their system, 
the Gorothites had deduced the nature of the 
different “lights” that moved through their night 
skies. Further, they had come to suspect that 
some of those lights might be homes to creatures 
more or less like themselves. The Corellian trad- 
ers were a touch disappointed that the planet- 
bound locals did not treat them like gods. But 
that disappointment passed when they found 
the Gorothites willing to buy any and all techno- 
logical items the traders carried. Following stan- 
dard operating procedure (for them), the traders 
accepted simple goods of local manufacture in 
return for high-tech items like comlinks, datapads 
and macrobinoculars — even though the local 
goods nowhere near matched the value of the 
technological items. Corellian traders had long 
ago realized the value of “loss leaders" — items 
sold for less than their value, with the intention 
of creating long-term customers for energy cells, 
upgrades and accessories. 

As soon as was practical, the Corellians re- 
turned to the Goroth system, heavily laden with 
more, and flashier, technological bagatelles to 
excite the natives. In return, they accepted not 
pots and basket-work this time, but tons of what 
the Gorothites viewed as “worthless rock.” Actu- 
ally these rocks contained pure metals such as 
osmium and iridium. While worthless to the 
Gorothites (due to their primitive technology 
they were unable to extact and utilize them), 
these metals were valuable to spacefaring cul- 
tures. The Corellians had still not learned of the 
hyperbarides, though. The concentration of 
hyperbarides in these ores was still so low that 
only a very intense scan would pick them up and 
the Corellians had no reason to suspect their 
presence or perform such a scan. 

For obvious reasons, the Corellian traders 
who found the Goroth system hoped to keep 
their discovery their own rather profitable little 
secret. It is perhaps fortunate for the Gorothites 
that things did not work out that way. In one of 
those strange coincidences that some claim to 
be the workings of “destiny,” an Ithorian herd- 
ship also discovered the heretofore unknown 
Goroth system, and revealed the Corellians’ se- 
cret to the Republic. 

Science teams and diplomatic representatives 


D N DA cs 


ARST 


descended upon the world, and within a remark- 
ably short time (as these things go), Goroth was 
inducted as a candidate for member-planet sta- 
tus in the Old Republic. The Republic prescribed 
a program that would advance the technological 
level, planetary wealth and overall standard of 
living as quickly as possible (limited only by the 
native sentients’ ability to absorb the changes). 
The Bureau of Acculturation — the government 
agency in charge of monitoring such programs — 
helped nudge the civilization of Goroth to a 
spacefaring culture within four centuries. 

During this phase of rapid growth, Goroth was 
monitored by on-site experts from the Bureau of 
Acculturation and other similar governmental 
bodies, whose responsibility was making sure 
cultural development progressed as expected. 
However, this on-site monitoring was quite lim- 
ited because the indigenous food crops of Goroth 
— and even the planet's air and water — were 
poisonous in the long-term for non-native life- 
forms due to the heavy metal and hyperbaride 
presence. Even while being “groomed” for full 
membership in the Old Republic, Goroth enjoyed 
an unusual degree of autonomy and self-determi- 
nation. Some 500 years after it had been discov- 
ered, Goroth was granted the status of full mem- 
bership in the Old Republic. 

From the outset, the Gorothites understood 
that the planet’s natural resources were of value 
to other worlds in the galaxy, and capitalized on 
that perceived value. For more than a millen- 
nium, Goroth flourished, trading ores for new 
technologies and for luxuries. 


Goroth at War 


Some four millennia before the present day, 
things began to change in the Trans-Nebular 
Sector. Corellian colonies began springing up 
throughout the region, sometimes squabbling 
among themselves, but more often cooperating 
as a kind of “Corellian bloc.” 

Meanwhile, various splinter factions of 
Aqualish (“Barralenal,” or “colonizer/pilgrims,” 
as they styled themselves) were making their 
presence felt in the region, establishing colonies 
of their own. These “colonizer/pilgrims” were 
Aqualish who were distressed by the “suppres- 
sion” of their native culture on their homeworld 
of Ando (for more information on this “suppres- 
sion,” see pages 13-14 of Galaxy Guide 4: Alien 
Races, Second Edition). They were looking for 
worlds where they could live the way they wanted 
— fighting each other and anyone else foolish 
enough to get in their way. It was only a matter of 
time before the Corellians and the Aqualish came 
into conflict. Many Aqualish still held an antipa- 
thy toward the Corellians, and none moresothan 
the “colonizer/pilgrims.” 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Chapter One: Histo 


ee, 
RS h 


A 
E AEO = 


EE Se'Lenti, “the Scouring,” strikes Goroth Prime. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 7 


A strong sector government would have rec- 
ognized the danger represented by the two ex- 
pansionistic and acquisitive groups, and done 
something to defuse the situation. Unfortunately, 
the Governor of the Trans-Nebular Sector — one 
Matri Bey — was a bureaucrat and not much ofa 
politician, and was more or less out of her depth 
in running an entire sector. Before she was even 
aware that trouble was brewing, the Corellian 
and Aqualish colonies were fighting a low-inten- 
sity war. Her attempts to quell this violence were 
notably inept and ineffective, and “border skir- 
mishes” soon escalated to all-out warfare be- 
tween the Corellian bloc and the Aqualish 
Barralenal. As an interesting footnote, the Jedi 
Knights did not become involved because they 
were apparently busy with other conflicts. 

Systems in the Trans-Nebular Sector began to 
choose sides. Still other systems did what they 
could to withdraw from the fray entirely, trying 
to keep a profile low enough that neither side 
would notice and “co-opt” them. 

As for Goroth, its mildly poisonous environ- 
ment and its distance from the established space- 
lanes combined to maintain the system's effec- 
tive autonomy. Some Gorothites were concerned 
by the spreading war. To protect Gorothite inter- 
ests, the government commissioned a new mili- 
tary force, the D’Jar’Min (which translates roughly 
to “Planetary Defense Arm”). More impressive in 
name than in actuality, the D’Jar’Min was initially 
little more than a symbol of autonomy. 

Over time, however, some real funding was 
transferred to the D’Jar’Min, and preliminary 
provisions for planetary defense were made. 
Goroth’s three small moons were refitted with 
heavy weapons to serve as permanent defensive 
battle stations. A powerful battery of ion can- 
nons, powered by large solar cells, was mounted 
on each satellite. Confident that these defensive 
stations represented all the protection the world 
of Goroth really needed, the planetary govern- 
ment froze all additional funding to the D'Jar’Min. 
Thus, Goroth had no “space navy” simply be- 
cause the government believed the ion batteries 
made such expenditure unnecessary. 


Profiteers 


Secure in its feeling of relative invulnerability, 
Goroth declared its neutrality as the Corellian/ 
Aqualish war spread across the Trans-Nebular 
Sector. Yet again, the system's location was an 
advantage: far enough beyond the developing 
battle-lines to be safe, yet close enough to the 
disputed zone to be important to both sides. 

In relatively low-level interstellar conflicts like 
the one developing between the Corellian bloc 
and the Aqualish Barralenal, a key issue was 
finding and utilizing supply depots and staging 


Chapter One: Histo DS) | a 


ARS 


areas for assault forces. Both sides of the war 
realized that the Goroth system was perfectly 
situated to become a “safe haven” for supplies 
and reserve forces. 

If the combatants had been better equipped, 
one or the other would have moved in and “an- 
nexed” Goroth. Or, more likely, both sides would 
have fought over the system. As things were, 
however, neither side could divert sufficient re- 
sources from the main war effort to take and hold 
the Goroth system. 

Instead of annexation, then, both factions de- 
cided on non-violent means to sway Goroth to 
their side. They shamelessly wooed the Goroth 
planetary government, offering everything from 
blandishments, through promises of future sup- 
port, to major infusions of currency and ad- 
vanced technology. 

At this time, the “Rel’Kan” (president of the 
Goroth planetary government) ruling the 
“P’Dar’Ken” (“Planetary Council”) was an indi- 
vidual called J’Kek D’rith Kalama. Rel’Kan J'Kek 
realized that Goroth was in a highly advanta- 
geous situation. Goroth’s value to both sides in 
the conflict was indisputable, but not quite high 
enough to warrant a diversion of force. This put 
the P’Dar’Ken in an excellent bargaining posi- 
tion. 

Under the canny leadership of Rel’Kan J’Kek, 
the Gorothite government played one side off 
against the other in a bidding war. When the 
Corellian colonies offered 15 megatons of spin- 
stabilized dylinium in return for the right to 
refuel their warships from the Goroth system’s 
two gas giants, Rel’Kan J’Kek extracted a promise 
of 20 megatons from the Aqualish in return for 
the same concession. When the Aqualish offered 
10,000 cubic meters of pressurized tibana gas to 
allow their troops to take their official leaves on 
the surface of Goroth Prime, Rel’Kan J’Kek sold 
the same privilege to the Corellians for an equal 
volume of the valuable gas. Throughout this 
bidding war, Goroth tenaciously maintained its 
neutrality; neither side in the conflict was al- 
lowed any concession that the other side could 
not also acquire — for a price. 

At a political level, Goroth remained a valu- 
able resource to be used by both sides. On a 
more personal level, however, the situation was 
almost surreal. Corellian “freedom-fighters” and 
Aqualish “holy warriors” — both on leave — 
would often find themselves drinking in the same 
establishment or rubbing shoulders on the 
streets. While violence often flared, it remained 
on a personal level and never escalated beyond 
barroom brawls and street-corner rumbles. Uni- 
formed troops — and undercover espionage op- 
eratives — flooded Goroth’s cities, injecting even 
more off-planet currency into the world's economy. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


ee AR AC One: Histo 


-WA 


Predictably, Rel’Kan J'Kek’s popularity with 
his people skyrocketed during this period. It 
takes a good statesman to keep his system from 
being ensnared in a war, the Gorothite populace 
believed; but it takes a brilliant one to remain 
neutral and to profit so lavishly at the same time. 

While elsewhere in the Trans-Nebular Sector 
the war was growing in ferocity, the Gorothites 
rewarded their Rel'Kan for his perspicacity by 
selecting him for an unprecedented fifth term. In 
fact, a grass-roots movement emerged that 
wanted to install J'Kek D’rith Kalama as “Presi- 
dent-for-Life"; this initiative was voted down in 
the P’Dar’Ken — but just barely. 

Not all Gorothites were overjoyed by the “bid- 
ding” war which Rel’Kan J’Kek seemed so adept 
at maintaining. A faction of political philoso- 
phers led by J’'Kek M'hoy Trinia — another mem- 
ber of the influential J'Kek clan— argued that the 
situation could not hold, and that the Rel’Kan 
was leading the planet toward the brink of disas- 
ter. The “bidding war” should be ended, these 
philosophers argued, before things went too far. 
The P’Dar’Ken should withdraw all concessions 
granted to both sides, and return to a policy of 
scrupulous neutrality, having nothing whatso- 
ever to do with either the Corellians or the 
Aqualish, 

Their arguments fell on deaf ears, however. 
Rel’Kan J'Kek, his advisors, and much of the 
government were intoxicated by what they saw 
as their power over the two combatants. For 
their part, the citizens were blinded to the poten- 
tial dangers by the vast influx of wealth and the 
increase in the standard of living that resulted 
from the fine balance Rel’Kan J'Kek was main- 
taining. The philosophers’ concerns were shouted 
down, and the government continued to push 
even harder for concessions from both sides. 


Catastrophe 


Eventually, Rel’Kan J’Kek’s government 
pushed too hard. Goroth’s demands grew too 
extreme. The balance shifted and no longer was 
it cheaper to placate and trade with the 
Gorothites. 

Nobody really knows which side cracked first 
or whether both decided to settle matters at 
about the same time. The logic that led to the 
catastrophe is cogent, however, and indepen- 
dent of which side reached the fateful conclusion 
first. 

It was the cold reality of interplanetary eco- 
nomics that sealed Goroth’s fate. Neither the 
Aqualish Barralenal nor the Corellian colonies 
could afford to “annex” Goroth. Conversely, nei- 
ther could afford to leave the world to be utilized 
by the enemy. Someone decided that Goroth had 
to be eliminated from the equation. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Conquest is time-consuming, and extremely 
costly. Obliteration, by contrast, is disturbingly 
inexpensive. 


Bombardment 


The government and people of Goroth re- 
ceived no warning. Goroth’s rudimentary Bl'Era 
Har (“Sky-Track”) system—run on avery limited 
budget by the under-funded D’Jar’Min — first 
detected the asteroids when they were only afew 
hours out. There were five of them — “endo- 
therm-killers,” historians would call them later. 
Within minutes of their initial detection, the Bl'Era 
Har personnel had pinned down the asteroids’ 
trajectories — and had confirmed what they had 
suspected and feared from the first moments. All 
five asteroids were on a collision course with the 
world of Goroth Prime. 

There was no way to stop, destroy or even 
deflect them. If the Goroth system had possessed 
a true space navy, there would have been a 
chance — albeit a slim one — that the incoming 
projectiles could be diverted (possibly through 
being rammed by starships, if through no other 
means). Goroth had no such navy, however. It 
lacked even a merchant shipping fleet— through- 
out its history, the system had depended on 
others to ferry supplies and trade goods. 

The three orbital defense stations were still 
operational and fully manned, but they were 
equipped only with ion cannons: lethally effec- 
tive against attacking warships but useless against 
unguided, free-falling rocks. 

The P’Dar'Ken had developed civil defense 
plans to respond to natural disasters like earth- 
quakes, but these plans simply were not de- 
signed to deal with a disaster of the scale that 
now faced the world. The Gorothites could do 
nothing — nothing at all — except seek what 
shelter they could and wait. 

They did not have to wait long. Less than a 
local day after they had first been detected, the 
first of the five asteroids slammed into the planet. 
Over the next 16 hours, the other four asteroids 
struck. In all, three struck land and the other two 
plunged into the oceans. 

Goroth rang like a gong as the land strikes 
cracked the planet’s crust, blasting megatons of 
debris into the atmosphere. Still, it was the two 
ocean strikes that were more damaging. Cubic 
kilometers of water were vaporized by the blow- 
torch heat of the asteroids. While much of that 
water quickly condensed out as rain, even more 
remained in suspension in the atmosphere, cloak- 
ing the entire planet in thick clouds which de- 
flected the light and heat of the sun. 

Multiple tidal waves, hundreds of meters high, 
spread out from the ocean strikes, inundating the 
surrounding coastlines, scouring away cities, 


arable land, and everything else in their way. 
Kilometers inland, the tsunamis eventually broke 
against the foothills of volcanoes suddenly woken 
from centuries-long dormancy. Earthquakes tore 
the land apart. Mountains softened and slumped; 
seas and rivers boiled away; geysers of deeply- 
buried radioactives burst forth from the centers 
of the burning impact craters, poisoning atmo- 
sphere, land and sea alike. Toxins spewing forth 
from the volcanoes almost totally destroyed the 
protective ozone layer and harsh ultraviolet en- 
ergy from the sun lashed the planet. In a matter 
of hours, Goroth had become a fiery wasteland. 

The crews of the planetary defense stations 
could only watch in helpless horror as their 
home was ravaged. The asteroid impacts were so 
violent that megatons of dust and debris were 
blown into orbit. Within hours of the impact, this 
expanding cloud of debris had extended out to 
the orbit of the three satellites. At orbital veloc- 
ity, the moons swept through the debris and 
space “shrapnel” destroyed the defense stations’ 
fragile solar cells, dooming the crews to slow 
death. 

It is impossible to determine how many died. 
Whole continents were wiped from the face of 
the planet; immense cities vanished beneath the 
waves or were swallowed by convulsions in the 
crust. Civil defense shelters were obliterated by 
lava flows and mud slides. One of the land strikes 
landed almost directly on the seat of the 
P’Dar’Ken; over 150 million Gorothites called the 
surrounding city home. Sector records estimate 
that the population of Goroth in the years before 
the cataclysm had been in excess of five billion 
souls. No more than two million survived. 


Aftermath 


It is surprising that any Gorothites survived 
the cataclysm at all, and a testament to their 
incredible resilience. 

The initial consequences of the “endotherm- 
killers” dissipated within weeks. The seismic 
resonances of the strikes eventually ceased to 
ring through the crust of the planet. The worst of 
the secondary strikes — chunks of planetary 
crust thrown into sub-orbital or unstable orbital 
trajectories that fell back to the surface — sub- 
sided. The survivors began to emerge from their 
various shelters. 

Many fell prey to the long-term consequences 
ofthe bombardment. The tectonic stability of the 
crust had been badly upset. As the plates shifted, 
the planet was racked with mighty earthquakes. 
Once dormant volcanoes burst back to life. Lava, 
mud and pyroclastic flows scoured the land down 
to bedrock in many places, wiping away all life. 
Millions of tons of particulate matter were flung 
into the atmosphere by these volcanoes, joining 


Chapter One: History == 8 A ees 


ARS 


the water and rock already injected into the 
atmosphere by the initial impacts. The climate 
changed drastically. 

Conditions that should lead to planetary warm- 
ing contended with those that should cause a 
dramatic cooling of the world (due to immense 
dust clouds blocking out all sunlight). In the long 
run — after years of storms seemingly violent 
enough to tear mountains themselves asunder — 
planetary warming won out, and Goroth’s aver- 
age temperature began to climb. 

When the asteroids struck, most of them 
punched right through the planetary crust into 
the asthenosphere below. Welling up from these 
rents in the planet's lithosphere, magma—laden 
with heavy elements and hyperbarides — spread 
out to form poisonous lakes of molten rock. 
While some of these craters closed themselves 
relatively quickly (as the magma cooled and 
solidified), some were kept liquid by upwellings 
of material, superheated by the planet's mantle 
below. Even centuries after the impact, many of 
these great pits burned, bubbled and surged, like 
open ports into the violent heart of the planet. 

When the surviving Gorothites emerged, it 
was into a world that closely matched their 
religion's depiction of the “netherworld,” where 
the souls of murderers and traitors are tortured 
for eternity. The sky was filled with thick, roiling 
clouds, lit by the ruddy light of distant fires. 
Titanic lightning bolts — a result of the massive 
static charge arising from all the particulates 
churning in the atmosphere — lashed the 
mountaintops. The land shook and shifted. Fre- 
quent shooting stars—delayed secondary strikes 
— lanced down through the cloud-deck. The air 
was hot and harsh, burning their throats raw. 

The reality of the situation was even worse 
than its appearance. The high technology that 
had allowed so many to live so well was concen- 
trated around the great cities. The great tsuna- 
mis had wiped them away forever. Those food 
crops and herds of food animals that had not 
been killed in the initial cataclysm died as a result 
of the lingernig conditions on Goroth. 

Of the Gorothites who emerged from their 
shelters, one in three died of starvation in the 
first year after the cataclysm. This time came to 
be known as Se’Lenti, “the Scouring.” Somehow, 
afew Gorothites managed to hang on, carving out 
a tenuous survival on the brink of planetary 
extinction. 

Still, another tragic factor worked against the 
survival of the Gorothites. The trace concentra- 
tions of highly-poisonous hyperbarides in the 
crust of the planet — and thus in the bodies of all 
indigenous creatures — reflected avery different 
condition deeper in the planet. The molten core 
of Goroth was incredibly rich in hyperbarides. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


~ X < SS 
Ce 
{= 


EE Overhead view of the o’beki of Graith. 


The concentrations of hyperbarides in the 
magma, which now flooded the surface, were 
much higher than the Gorothites were used to, 
and thus the crust of the planet itself was “poi- 
soned” by its own interior. The air of Goroth was 
quickly contaminated by the poisonous 
hyperbarides. As rain fell, it absorbed chemical 
compounds out of the atmosphere—sulfur com- 
pounds, which created the sulfuric acid of “acid 
rain”; and hyperbaride salts, which were respon- 
sible for poisonous “hard rain.” Through air and 
water, the entire surface of the world was eventu- 
ally contaminated by hyperbarides. 

For any other species, this would have led to 
extinction. The Gorothites (and certain other 
species native to the world), had evolved in the 
presence of hyperbarides — if only in trace quan- 
tities —and had some degree of innate immunity. 
Granted, the concentrations to which they were 
now exposed were orders of magnitude greater 
to that which they were used to. Immunity or no, 
hyperbarides in excessive amounts still killed 
Gorothites. 

As it turned out, the hyperbarides contaminat- 
ing the landscape were both doom and salvation. 
As well as being cytotoxins (which would have 
killed off most creatures), many compounds of 
hyperbarides — such as the hyperbaride salts in 
the “hard rain” — are effective mutagens. The 
rate of mutation in all of Goroth’s species sky- 
rocketed. While the majority of the mutations 
that arose were detrimental, some populations 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


began to develop an increased resistance to the 
cytotoxic effects of hyperbarides. 


Reconstruction 


By increasing both the intensity of natural 
selection and the incidence of mutation, the 
Se’Lenti significantly increased the rate of evolu- 
tion. The surviving Gorothites reached physical 
maturity quickly, enabling them to have new 
generations in a very short period of time. Indi- 
vidual Gorothites could quite conceivably live to 
see the birth of their own great-great-grandchil- 
dren. 

Within a few centuries, increased resistance 
to the cytotoxic effects of hyperbarides was well 
established throughout the gene pool of the 
Gorothites. This gene, of necessity, also devel- 
oped in the other species of Goroth that sur- 
vived. This trait quickly became established as a 
simple single-locus dominant in these species’ 
genotypes. 

While the majority of offspring carried at least 
one copy of the gene for resistance, the mechan- 
ics of genetic inheritance ensured that in a cer- 
tain percentage of offspring the non-resistant 
gene would be reinforced, and the offspring would 
die. The Gorothite society that was re-emerging 
from the after-effects of the Scouring had to come 
to terms with an infant mortality near 10%. Still, 
the population began to increase — slowly at 
first, but at a steadily increasing rate. 

Within a thousand years of the Scouring, the 


Chapter One: Histo 


Mike Vilardi 


Dan & David Day 


Chapter One: Histo 


12 


population had climbed back to nearly ten mil- 
lion. Now, four millennia after the Scouring, it 
approaches the half-billion point. 

Always stubborn and tenacious — and excep- 
tionally adaptable—the Gorothites buckled down 
and began to rebuild what they could of their lost 
civilization. They were hindered by the fact that 
they had lost much knowledge and technology. 
Centers of learning — such as universities, re- 
search facilities, and computerized library data- 
bases — were destroyed in the Se’Lenti. The 
Gorothites had to make do with what was left. 

Their society’s infrastructure had been al- 
most totally destroyed. Sources of usable energy 
— hydroelectric dams, nuclear power plants and 
geothermal plants — had all been ruined, as had 
normal channels of communication. Thus, in the 
early days of the Reconstruction, small pockets 
of survivors sprung up. They were isolated en- 
claves, often unaware that there were other sur- 
vivors elsewhere on the planet. When these en- 
claves finally managed to communicate with each 
other and coordinate their efforts, the rate of 
rebuilding increased. 

Even today, however, Gorothite society still 
reflects these early days of the Reconstruction. 
The enclaves of survivors were located in those 
parts of the planet least affected by the Scouring 
(out of logical necessity: it was only in these 
locales that anyone managed to survive). When 
technology was recovered or developed that 
could improve conditions — by filtering the air 


ee ee | = 


ARS 


and water, by stabilizing the crust (to some de- 
gree, at least), by plugging the smaller volcanic 
vents that still belched toxins into the atmo- 
sphere, and so forth — the amelioration work 
was, of course, concentrated on the neighbor- 
hood of these enclaves. 

Thus, the enclaves were turned into o’beki 
(“havens”) — areas where conditions are rela- 
tively benign. As with many things on Goroth, the 
key word here is again “relatively.” Compared to 
the Yar’En (“Firelands”), for example, the o’beki 
are paradise. Compared to conditions on other 
worlds, by contrast, they still resemble night- 
mare realms. 

The Gorothites have managed to reconstruct 
a planetary civilization. Out of necessity, it was 
quite different from what existed before the cata- 
clysm. Still, there was once more a central gov- 
ernment to which all the enclaves and o’beki paid 
allegiance. The overall level of technology has 
edged back upward, although still falling short of 
modern Imperial technology. 


The Imperial Era 


In the intervening millennia, the brush-fire war 
between the Correllian colonies and the Aqualish - 
had died down — and, in fact, had been largely 
forgotten. Records still existed that mentioned 
the Goroth system, but the general conclusion 
was that the world had been destroyed. Like the 
war that had ravaged it, Goroth itself was largely 
forgotten. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


a AR NATE One: Histo 


-WA 


Elsewhere in the galaxy, momentous events 
were taking place. The Empire arose, and with 
that change in government came a consolidation 
of power. The Trans-Nebular Sector Moff had 
established himself as a de facto warlord. This 
came to a sudden end when a task force of 
Imperial Star Destroyers emerged from hyper- 
space in close orbit around the sector’s capital. 
Despite the current Moff’s claims of loyalty and 
obedience, the commander of the task force sent 
adetachment of stormtroopers down tothe planet 
to arrest the entire sector government. A court 
martial was convened, the governor and his lack- 
eys were tried for treason against the Empire, 
and before the day was out the key members of 
the government were terminated. The majority 
of the task force quickly moved on; there were 
other provinces that needed the same “shock 
treatment” as the Trans-Nebular Sector, after all. 
The Imperials left behind anew Moff, Nebin Cray, 
and a small force that would become the core of 
anew sector fleet. 

As part of his new duties, the Moff began 
reviewing the (somewhat disorganized) records 
left behind by his late predecessor. Buried in 
these records, he found mention of the Correllian/ 
Aqualish war. A search through various histori- 
cal databases led him to an entry describing the 
fate of Goroth — and hinting at its value as a 
storehouse of strategically-important metals, The 
Moff dispatched a scouting mission to this for- 
gotten system. 


Planetfall 


Once again, an out-of-system ship appeared in 
orbit around the world of Goroth Prime at a key 
point in history. This time the vessel was an 
Imperial Bayonet-class light cruiser, the Nastion. 
Judging by the information gleaned from the old 
provincial records, the captain of the Nastion 
expected to find a dead world. He was utterly 
surprised, then, to find that the Gorothite civili- 
zation still existed. 

Still, indigenous populations were not the 
captain's concern. If Goroth was as rich in heavy 
metals as the records implied, he reasoned, a 
superficial assay at any point on the surface 
would show it. Accordingly, he sent down a 
survey crew aboard a small shuttle, which lost 
attitude control almost immediately after enter- 
ing the roiling atmosphere. The shuttle crashed, 
killing all aboard. 

Ahurried investigation into the circumstances 
of the crash (the Nastion's captain had, of course, 
to consider the possibility of hostile action by 
the natives) turned up a significant fact. Appar- 
ently, the cataclysm had significantly altered the 
magnetic field of the planet. This, coupled with 
the level of radiation in the air (and other, as-yet 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


unexplained factors), tended to make repulsorlift 
generators malfunction. 

As was normal with the class of shuttle used 
by the ill-fated survey crew, the shuttle pilot had 
entered the atmosphere under normal ion drive. 
While searching for a suitable place to land, 
however, he had switched over to repulsorlift so 
he could hover just below the low cloud deck. 
Fluctuations in the power of the repulsorlift en- 
gines made the shuttle highly unstable, and be- 
fore he could recover control, the high winds 
that roiled the clouds dashed the small ship into 
a mountain-side. 

The Nastion’s captain did not make the same 
mistake twice. This time he sent down an un- 
manned probe, controlled remotely from orbit. 
The probe, too, became unstable the moment it 
switched to repulsorlift operation, but — fore- 
warned — the remote pilot managed to keep the 
smaller vessel under control and land safely. The 
probe retrieved a core sample, lifted off, and 
returned to the cruiser. 

An assay of the core sample quite literally 
staggered the Nastion’s captain. As he had been 
told to expect, Goroth’s crust was rich in valu- 
able heavy metals. Moreimportantly, however, it 
was also liberally laced with hyperbarides — 
measured in parts per billion, now, rather than in 
parts per quadrillion. The planet was an absolute 
mother-lode of materials with great strategic 
military value, The Nastion immediately returned 
to the sector capital. The Moff, in turn, hurriedly 
informed his superiors and requested the assets 
necessary to “utilize” the planet. 

As it turned out, those superiors had concerns 
oftheir own... ones far-removed from one forgot- 
ten world in a distant and very minor sector. 
When the request for exploitation assets arrived 
from Moff Cray, Imperial command put the re- 
quest on hold. While the Empire recognized that 
Goroth was of strategic value, that value was 
long-term, requiring a significant investment to 
properly exploit. The Empire was in the midst of 
an unprecedented military expansion, and no 
funding was to be diverted from its massive ship- 
building program. 

Some military analysts consider the Imperial 
Navy’s actions regarding Goroth to be short- 
sighted and foolish, evidence that Imperial strat- 
egists simply did not understand the true value 
ofthe planet. This is not really the case, however, 
Most of the Navy’s leadership did recognize the 
importance of Goroth — enough, at least, to 
“rediscover,” as it were, the cruel equation that 
doomed the Gorothites once before. 

The Empire could not afford to annex Goroth 
and strip it of its hyperbarides. Neither could it 
afford to leave this world unused. 


Chapter One: Histo 


The Corporate Sphere 


This time there was a third factor in the equa- 
tion: the megacorporations. Much as it galled 
him, the Moff had to admit that he could not 
exploit Goroth properly because he simply did 
not have the available resources. The 
megacorporations, on the other hand, certainly 
did have the resources to do so, and were willing 
to do whatever it took to get a slice of the 
“hyperbaride pie.” : 

Thus — with the approval of the region’s Grand 
Moff — the Moff struck an unusual deal. Those 
megacorporations interested in exploiting Goroth 
could bid for the right to do so. The winning 
bidders would be granted certain rights and privi- 
leges with respect to Goroth, and the hyperbaride 
trade in general. In return for these rights and 
privileges, they would have to subordinate them- 
selves totally to the authority of a planetary Colo- 
nial Governor to be assigned by the Moff. This 
Colonial Governor would have ultimate authority 
as far as the participating corporations were con- 
cerned. Most importantly, he would have the right 
to withdraw exploitation rights from any corpora- 
tion that failed to play by the rules. 

Predictably, the corporations hated the con- 
cept of putting themselves under the direct au- 
thority of anyone. Still, they recognized the im- 
mense value of Goroth, and figured this would 
turn out to be a good deal for them. After all, 
many executives reasoned, agreeing to condi- 
tions is not the same as abiding by those condi- 
tions. On Goroth, as elsewhere under the Empire, 
corporate conduct would be guided by the 
“Golden Rule”: “Don’t Get Caught.” 

When it actually came to bidding for exploita- 
tion rights, the Moff finally decided to offer three 
distinct types of contracts. 


° “Primary Rights” —the most expensive — were 
more or less “anything-goes” letters of marque 
that allowed the corporations possessing them 
to do virtually anything — anything that wasn’t 
directly in contravention of Imperial interests, of 
course. The definition of “in contravention of 
Imperial interests” would be left largely up to the 
Colonial Governor. The corporations immedi- 
ately realized that this set-up made the Governor 
an incredibly influential man. 


e “Secondary Rights” were more restrictive, put- 
ting limits on just what “local resources” could 
be exploited, and how. 


* “Subsidiary Rights” — the cheapest of the lot — 
allowed the possessor to negotiate with those 
companies holding Primary or Secondary Rights 
for subcontracts. In essence, Subsidiary Rights 
gave smaller corporations the privilege of squab- 
bling with each other over the leavings of the 
Primary and Secondary Rights-holders. 


ARST 


Two of the largest megacorporations in the 
Empire acquired primary rights: The Tagge Com- 
pany (TaggeCo) and The Karflo Corporation. 
Secondary rights were acquired by Trigdale Met- 
allurgy and Vaufthau Processing Industries. Fi- 
nally, a half-dozen or so smaller corporations 
snapped up subsidiary rights, and began scrap- 
ping over the “spillage” from the major players. 


Forced “Recovery” 


Unfortunately, exploiting the resources on 
Goroth is not much easier for the mega- 
corporations than itis for the Empire. Even though 
conditions have improved slightly over the four 
millennia since the Se'Lenti, Goroth is still a 
poisoned world. Its air and water — and even its 
life-forms — are poisonous to just about any off- 
planet being. In the o'beki, where the Gorothites 
live, the atmosphere and water are slow poisons, 
but poisons nonetheless. Closer to the volcanoes 
— located along the tectonic subduction zones 
— and near the still-molten asteroid-strike cra- 
ters, conditions are orders of magnitude worse 
(Type illatmosphere): rapid and agonizing death 
to any off-worlder not wearing a complete 
envirosuit. 

Of course, it is these areas — the most hostile 
on the planet — where the concentrations of 
hyperbarides are at their highest, and thus the 
places of most interest to the corporations. 

Not only biologicals suffer from ambient con- 
ditions, of course. As the first Imperial survey 
crew discovered to their terminal detriment, fluc- 
tuating radiation levels make it very risky to use 
standard repulsorlift technology. Further, the 
same conditions prove remarkably hostile to 
droids— specifically, to their logic circuits. With- 
out special (and expensive) “hardening,” droids 
quickly suffer damage to their central proces- 
sors, experience a kind of “nervous breakdown,” 
and have to be repaired or replaced. 

Certainly, there are ways around these prob- 
lems. Envirosuits could protect workers from 
hyperbaride and radiation poisoning. Heavily- 
modified repulsorlift drives could be made to 
operate safely on Goroth. And hardening could 
protect droids and other computer-controlled 
equipment from logic malfunctions. All these 
solutions were expensive, however — some ex- 
tremely so. Any costs incurred in exploiting the 
resources of Goroth would decrease corporate 
profits — and the megacorporations will do any- 
thing to avoid losing profits. 

The primary rights-holders quickly recognized 
a way to keep their costs down. Rather than 
importing expensive specialized technology, why 
not use what was right there at hand? After all, 
the Gorothites themselves were at least partially 
resistant to hyperbaride poisoning and had plenty 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


d A Rer One: Histo 


-WA 


of experience surviving and working in the harsh 
environment. 

Itwas TaggeCo that first approached the Colo- 
nial Governor about using the “indigenous as- 
sets” as workers. After extensive lobbying — 
and, some people claim, the judicious transfer of 
credit in “forgivable interest-free loans” — the 
Colonial Governor finally agreed with TaggeCo’s 
proposal that using the Gorothites as “client- 
workers” (read “slaves”) would not be “in contra- 
vention of Imperial interests.” 

The Karflo Corporation's local representatives 
demanded thesamerights and privileges as soon 
as they learned of the agreement — Karflo too 
was a primary rights-holder, after all — and the 
Colonial Governor was forced to agree. 

So that is how the current situation has come 
to pass. The Colonial Government has estab- 
lished its seat in the largest of the o’beki, known 
as Graith, arelatively sheltered valley in the high 
mountains. This o’beki is also the center of 
megacorporate activity on the planet. TaggeCo, 
Karflo and the others all have their local head- 
quarters here, in environment-controlled pres- 
surized domes — known locally as “pressures.” 
These pressures are connected by enclosed tun- 
nels and tubes through which “movators” and 
“people movers” run. 

The Gorothite inhabitants of Graith live out- 
side these pressures, in subterranean settlements 
and extensive cliff-dwellings. 

The native planetary government of Goroth 
still exists. There is still a planetary Rel’Kan, and 
aP’Dar’Ken. Officially, the Colonial Governor and 
his government hold an “advisory” position, sub- 
ordinate to the Rel’Kan and the P’Dar’Ken coun- 
cil. All decrees and declarations made to the 
native population of Goroth are issued in the 
name ofthe Rel’Kan, and ratified by the rest of the 
P’Dar’Ken by Orders-in-Council. On other worlds 
of the Empire, the news media sometimes holds 
up the world of Goroth as an example of “peace- 
ful cooperation” between the Imperial bureau- 
cracy and a duly-elected planetary government. 

The truth of the matter is quite different, of 
course. Thenative governmentis anemptysham, 
a figurehead with no real power. The Colonial 
Governor and the corporate representatives are 
the true rulers of Goroth. Their word is effec- 
tively law, and the Rel’Kan and P’Dar’Ken must 
“rubber-stamp” whatever they decide. The 
Rel’Kan and the P’Dar’Ken’Al (“council-mem- 
bers”) all know that refusing to do so will simply 
lead to their being replaced by more malleable 
“politicians.” While some members of the 
P’Dar’Ken rather relish the perks that come with 
their position, others stay in their positions in 
the hope that they can somehow help their fellow 
Gorothites. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Other o’beki around the planet have their own 
P’Dar’Ib (“local councils”) — and their own Impe- 
rial Regional Prefects (extensions of the colonial 
government). Again, the fictionis that the P’Dar’Ib 
have the true authority, while the Regional Pre- 
fects are just “advisors.” All but the most naive 
Gorothites recognize this as a lie, of course. The 
corporations also haveastrong local presence in 
each of the enclaves. Although the complexes of 
corporate and colonial “pressures” are not as 
extensive as in Graith, they still exist, casting 
shadows — real and metaphorical — over the 
homes of the native Gorothites. 

Further extending Imperial control, any sig- 
nificant native Gorothite industry has been offi- 
cially “nationalized” — to “better serve the indig- 
enous natives,” of course, through centraliza- 
tion, coordination and economy of scale. In ef- 
fect, any industry or business large enough to 
affect the planetary economy is under direct 
Imperial control, through the Colonial Governor, 
and under the indirect influence of the corpora- 
tions. Thus, the overwhelming majority of 
Gorothites work indirectly for the Empire and 
the corporations — at wages set by the Colonial 
Governor, as advised by the corporate execu- 
tives. 

No matter how strenuously the Colonial Gov- 
ernor claims that Goroth has a free economy, it’s 
far from free. Wages are set by the Governor. 
Businesses that produce goods for consumption 
by the natives are also controlled, and prices are 
set by the central government. Competition is 
totally managed. If a new business springs up, 
offering goods or services in competition with an 
“officially sanctioned” nationalized company, 
then that organization is quickly driven out of 
business — perhaps through direct government 
intervention in the form of “licensing restric- 
tions” or perhaps through nationalization by the 
Governor's office. These actions are purportedly 
taken by the Rel’Kan and P’Dar’Ken, of course, 
and only for “benevolent” reasons. The recover- 
ing economy of Goroth is highly fragile, the offi- 
cial party line goes, and only through central 
coordination can that economy be maintained 
and nurtured. 

Independent businesses, outside this central 
coordination, areathreat to the overall economy 
and well-being of the natives, and thus to be 
avoided. Again, only the most naive of Gorothites 
fail to recognize that the Rel’Kan and P’Dar’Ken 
are powerless, and that these actions are being 
directed by the Colonial Governor and the corpo- 
rations to cement their control over every facet 
of native life. 

Most Gorothites work — directly or indirectly 
— for the megacorporations, exploiting the min- 
eral wealth of the planet. Millions of Gorothites 


work in the most terrible of conditions, extract- 
ing hyperbarides from poisoned, volcanic waste- 
lands (such as Yar’En, the “Firelands,” and Na’R 
Ji’Gek, “Doomgate”). The ugly truth of the matter 
is that these “client-workers” are slaves of the 
Empire and the corporations. No matter what 
term is used to describe them, the reality is 
unavoidable: a worker who cannot quit, cannot 
go on strike, receives a subsistence salary, and 
can buy goods only from his employer at prices 
set by that employer is, in truth, a slave. 


The Resistance Movement 


Predictably, a resistance movement has 
emerged on Goroth. Natives who want their world 
freed of the Imperial and megacorporate yoke 
have banded together in cells and small organi- 
zations. “Freedom-fighters,” most call themselves; 
the Colonial Government, of course, brands them 
“terrorists” and “saboteurs” and is doing what- 
ever it can to stamp them out. 

Currently there are a handful of resistance 
organizations throughout Goroth. Although they 
share a common goal — the removal of Imperial 
oppression — they do not agree on the best way 
toachieve this goal. Some promote passive resis- 
tance, and very limited “civil disobedience.” Oth- 
ers believe that only through shocking violence 
and terror — by making Goroth totally ungovern- 
able — can the Imperial yoke be lifted. 

The largest and most influential of these orga- 
nizations, Gor’Jen’Ar (the “Committee for Free 
Goroth”), tries to steer a middle course. Its lead- 
ers believe that passive resistance alone will not 
work and that more direct action is necessary. 
They recognize, however, that it is possible to 
become too militant. Currently, the Gorothites 
are being used as “client-workers” only because 
doing so is cheaper than bringing in the expen- 
sively-modified technology that would replace 
them. 

The shadowy leaders of the Gor’Jen’Ar fear 
that overly militant action — like that counte- 
nanced by the splinter T’B’Dellyi’ Mai (“People’s 
Freedom Action Council”) — will change this 
equation to the detriment of all Gorothites. While 
the T’B’Dellyi’Mai believes that making it simply 
too expensive to do business on Goroth will lead 
to an Imperial withdrawal, the Gor’Jen’Ar fears 
that the Empire will take more direct action. As 
soon as it becomes cheaper to replace the “cli- 


ent-workers” with technology, the Empire will 
replace them. Once there is no benefit in using 
“client-workers,” the indigenous population of 
Gorothites will become a liability. And the Em- 
pire has a history of taking harsh action against 
liabilities. 

The Gor’Jen’Ar leaders share a very real fear 
that too much militancy will lead to the oblitera- 
tion of the Gorothite species. As the world has 
already learned once, extermination is cheaper 
than subjugation. What is to prevent the Empire 
from initiating a genocidal campaign against the 
natives? 


Rebel Involvement 


It is through the resistance movement — 
largely through the Gor’Jen’Ar, although other 
groups are also involved — that a limited Rebel 
presence has finally come to Goroth. It has only 
been in the last couple of years that the Rebel 
Alliance has cometo recognize the value of Goroth 
— to the Empire, and potentially to themselves 
as well. 

The hyperbarides scoured from the crust of 
Goroth are being used in the hyperdrives and 
turbolasers of Imperial capital ships — ships that 
are being used against the Rebel Alliance. Obvi- 
ously, there is great military advantage in slow- 
ing — or, ideally, stopping — this flow of 
hyperbarides from Goroth to Imperial shipyards. 

There is another side to the question too, of 
course. The Rebel Alliance itself is building capi- 
tal ships of its own. Goroth represents an incred- 
ible source of the vital hyperbarides. If the Alli- 
ance could somehow secure Goroth for itself, the 
rate at which it could expand its own fleet would 
increase many-fold. 

Thus, the Rebel Alliance would love to see the 
Imperial and corporate presence removed from 
Goroth. Then the Alliance could move into the 
power vacuum, helping the Gorothites to estab- 
lish their own, truly independent, planetary gov- 
ernment — a government that would, of course, 
be friendly toward and owe a huge debt of grati- 
tude to the Rebel Alliance. 

The Rebel Alliance is incapable of taking direct 
action. While the Imperial Moff in the Trans- 
Nebular Sector is comparatively weak, there is 
no way that the Rebel fleet could liberate and 
hold Goroth. Their best bet is to support the 
moderate — yet still effective — factions within 
the Gorothite resistance movement. 


a a aaa 


16 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


STA 
-WA 


EE Chapter Two 
System Overview 


Goroth is one of the 80 or so systems in the 
Trans-Nebular Sector. This region of space lies 
10 parsecs or so within the outer boundary of the 
Mid-Rim (within The Slice; for more information 
on the Mid-Rim and The Slice, see pages 131-132 
of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edi- 
tion). 

Within the Trans-Nebular Sector is the Trans- 
Nebular Zone, which has about a dozen systems, 
Goroth being among them. The zone (and sector) 
takes its name from the major “landmark” in the 
area, the Vestor Nebula. The Vestor Nebula is a 
great cloud of ionized gas. At its core is the 
Vestor Pulsar, a neutron star that is the rapidly- 
spinning “cinder” of a giant star that went super- 
nova millennia ago. Twin jets of ionized gas, shot 
out from the vicinity of the neutron star at almost 
inconceivable velocity, sweep through space like 
beams from a cosmic lighthouse, as the neutron 
star spins and precesses. With a pulsation rate 
that remains constant within a tiny fraction of 
one percent from year to year, the Vestor Pulsar 
serves as an excellent navigation beacon in this 
region of the galaxy. Ships can take a bearing and 
avery accurate “time tick” from it. 

The Vestor Pulsar produces gravitational fluc- 
tuations which pose a very real hazard to hyper- 
space navigation. Since such records have been 
kept, over a dozen survey and research ships 
have gone missing in the region of the Vestor 
Nebula, presumably due to the interference which 
is likely to have thrown them subtly off course, 
possibly into a star or other hazard. For this 
reason, the Vestor Nebula itself remains a “dead 
zone.” Only the most foolhardy or desperate 
captains plot hyperspace jumps to take them 
through the Nebula itself. The only safe routes to 
the Trans-Nebular Zone systems involve mul- 
tiple jumps, normally two- or three-leg routes. It 
is for this reason that the Trans-Nebular systems 
— including Goroth — were discovered so late in 
the course of galactic history. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Travel Times and Distances 


Due to the hazards of traveling in the area, the 
Goroth system is isolated and remote in terms of 
travel times. A typical three-leg route from the 
margin of the Perlemian Trade Route takes 12 
days (Moderate astrogation difficulty). A two-leg 
route can cut this time by up to two days, but the 
chances of a navigational error are increased 
(increase the difficulty to Difficult). 

The nearest inhabited system to Goroth is the 
Baylin Cluster, one of the Correllian colonies 
involved in the war that led to the Scouring of 
Goroth Prime. The Baylin Cluster is 14 hours 
from Goroth by a direct hyperspace route (Mod- 
erate astrogation difficulty). 

The capital of the sector (and home of the 
current Sector Moff, Gal Brello), Milarian, is 22 
hours from Goroth (Moderate astrogation diffi- 
culty). 


System Primary 


The primary of the Goroth system is Goroth 
Alpha, referred to by the Gorothites as “K’Len” 
(“The Mother”) or, more commonly, “the sun.” It 
is a main-sequence star, red-orange in color. Its 
size, mass, surface temperature, radiation out- 
put and gravity are standard for this type of star. 


Planets 
Oris 


Ancient Gorothite poetry describes Oris as 
“sheltering in the fiery skirts of K’Len, The 
Mother.” While not quite accurate, it is descrip- 
tive. Oris—an ancient word for “birth” or “dawn” 
— orbits close to Goroth Alpha, with a perihelion 
of 2.6 light-minutes. It is a small world, roughly 
spherical with a diameter of 2,950 kilometers. In 
other systems, it would probably be classed as 
an asteroid. It is almost exclusively nickel-iron, 
with some metamorphic rock inclusions. Blow- 
torched by the sun, it is scorched and lifeless. 

Imperial astronomers automatically assumed 


Chapter Two: System Overview 


that so small a planet so close to its primary 
would have to be tidally-locked. They were sur- 
prised to learn that Oris’ rotational period does 
not match its orbital period. This effective rota- 
tion is very slow, however —a “day” on Oris lasts 
31 standard days from sunset to sunset — and is 
actually slowing down at a measurable (though 
minuscule) rate. The conclusion is that Oris is a 
relatively recent addition to the Goroth system 
(on an astronomical time-scale, of course), more 
than likely a“dark wanderer” captured by Goroth 
Alpha’s gravity. 


Goroth Prime 


Orbiting with a perihelion of 7.1 light-minutes, 
Goroth Prime is the only planet in the system to 
develop sentient life. Its structure follows the 
standard terrestrial paradigm, with a molten 
nickel-iron core surrounded by a semi-solid 
mantle, and a solid lithosphere. The only feature 
that sets it apart from standard terrestrial worlds 
is the relatively high concentration of 
hyperbarides in its core, asthenosphere and 
mantle. Since the Scouring, Goroth has been 
surrounded by a tenuous ring. 

Goroth Prime has three natural satellites. They 
are in a single orbit, situated in a stable orienta- 
tion precisely 120 degrees apart. They are all 
tidally locked with the planet below, so that they 
keep the same face eternally toward the planet 
below. This was a benefit for the planetary de- 
fense system, since the ion cannons of the 
D’Jar’Min had constant and interlocking fields of 
fire. The satellites — airless spheres of rock, 
showing no magnetic field or volcanism — are 
similar in appearance and size. Telar has a diam- 
eter of 2,850 kilometers; J’Mel is 2,600 kilometers 
in diameter; V’Sar is the smallest, with a diameter 
of 1,760 kilometers. 


Denava 


Denava is a gas giant, banded with reds and 
browns that indicate complex organic com- 
pounds in its upper atmosphere. It orbits with a 
perihelion of 40.7 light-minutes, its orbit inclined 
at 5° to the ecliptic. It is a large world, 153,050 
kilometers in diameter. Its density is low, how- 
ever — less than that of water — implying that 
any solid core must be quite small, and com- 
posed of nothing denser than solid hydrogen and 
methane ice. Its atmosphere consists largely of 
hydrogen — with a small but significant concen- 
tration of helium, plus many trace elements — 
which makes it valuable for starships refitted to 
run on hydrogen instead of more traditional pro- 
cessed, high-energy fuel slugs. By skimming the 
upper fringes of its atmosphere, a modified ship 
can refill its tanks with hydrogen. 

Denava has an immensely strong magnetic 
field, and is quite a strong radio source. The 


Chapter Two: System Overview =m BAe 


Chapter Two: System Overview STAR 


nearest of its six small moons act like the rotors 
of a planetary generator, and high-voltage con- 
duits of ionized gas — invisible, but nonetheless 
dangerous to unwary spaceships — connect them 
to the gas giant. 

Intelligent life never evolved on Denava, but 
this does not mean that the world is lifeless. Huge 
gasbag-like creatures can be found in various 
bands of the atmosphere, “grazing” like great 
whales on the organic materials that fallas “snow” 
from the upper levels of the clouds. 


Denbalen 


Denbalen is another gas giant, slightly smaller 
than Denava at 147,100 kilometers in diameter, 
but still a colossus. Its orbit is not inclined with 
respect to the ecliptic, but it is retrograde. 
Denbalen has a perihelion of 67.2 light-minutes. 

In appearance, Denbalen is quite similar to 
Denava, showing the same red and brown bands 
of clouds, eternally roiled by planet-wide storms. 
The dynamics of the planet are quite different, 
however. Denbalen’s density is significantly 
higher than Denava’s — still less than that of 
water, but great enough to imply that there must 
be a solid world, not significantly smaller than 
Goroth Prime itself, at its core. Denbalen has no 
magnetic field whatsoever, and is not a radio 
source. Still, the temperature of its cloud-tops is 
several degrees higher than would be predicted 
solely from solar heating, so there must be some 
kind of activity deep within the titanic world. 
Denbalen is thought to be lifeless although stud- 
ies of the great planet have been limited. Denbalen 
has seven satellites. 

All but one — P’Chek (“Mystery”) — are air- 
less spheres of frigid rock. P’Chek, in contrast, 
has an atmosphere almost as dense as that of 
Goroth Prime itself. This atmosphere, however, 
is almost exclusively oxygen — 98%, in fact — 
with the only other major component being he- 
lium. Planetologists are at a complete loss to 
explain how such an atmosphere could have 
naturally come about in the absence of any plant 
life on the world. 

Even more fascinating, P'Chek was obviously 
inhabited in the distant past. Ruins of artificial 
structures can be found spotted around the 
“coastlines” of large, shallow depressions that 
might once have been the beds of oceans. The 
ruins seem quite similar in architecture to the 
structures built today by the Twi'lek species. 
The Twi'leks, however, have no record of ever 
having visited the Goroth system (especiallysince 
they are a relatively primitive species, techno- 
logically-speaking). 

In any case, carbon-dating and other tech- 
niques indicate that these ruins are more than a 
billion years old. As its name signifies, P’Chek is 
— and will probably remain — a mystery. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


— T AR Chg ter Two: System Overview 


I Chapter Two: System Overview 


Goroth Beta 


Goroth Beta is a “brown dwarf” — the second 
member of a binary star system that never “ig- 
nited” its nuclear furnace. Orbiting far, far out 
from the primary — its perihelion is a staggering 
340.3 light-minutes (5.67 light-hours) — Goroth 
Beta is a gas giant, almost one and one half times 
the diameter of Denava (227,575 kilometers, to 
be precise), Like Denava, the temperature at the 
surface of its dark brown cloud cover is abnor- 
mally high. Obviously, the radiation reaching the 
planet from the distant sun is totally inadequate 
to explain this heating. Goroth Beta must havea 
hot core, with heat reaching the surface of the 
clouds through radiation and convection. Many 
planetary scientists believe that there must be at 
least some fusion occurring in the core of Goroth 
Beta. In other words, its “nuclear furnace” is 
burning after all, but at a slow, measured rate. 

Little is known about Goroth Beta. It is so far 
from the sun that few research missions have 
made the journey. It seems that little can be 
learned from even close inspection, however. A 
thorough understanding of the brown dwarf can 
come only from probes sent down into its fiery 
heart. Such probes were beyond the capabilities 
of the Gorothites themselves, and the Imperials 
have little interest in any research that cannot be 
expected to yield useful (in other words, profit- 
able) data. Goroth Beta has no satellites, and is 
thought to be lifeless. 


A Travelers’ Advisory 


The Vestor Nebula and the pulsar at its heart 
are not the only hazards to navigation in this 
region. Since the Scouring, it has been somewhat 
hazardous to approach the Goroth system at all. 
This is because the asteroid impacts flung mega- 
tons of hyperbaride-rich debris into space. Much 
of this has fallen back to the planet — either as 
secondary strikes or as “hard rain” — while 
significant amounts remain in orbit as Goroth 
Prime’s tenuous ring. Countless tons, however, 
remain in Goroth system space, forming a “halo” 
of hyperbaride-rich material. The concentration 
of material in realspace can be measured in 
molecules per cubic meter of space. In hyper- 
space, however, the situation is quite different. 
For reasons not fully understood, superheavy 
elements like hyperbarides seem to cast a larger 


“hyperspace shadow” than one would predict 
from their mass and concentration. In hyper- 
space, the halo around Goroth Prime is very 
noticeable indeed. 

This halo thus represents avery real hazard to 
hyperspace navigation. It is dangerous to fly 
close to Goroth Prime while in hyperspace. Stan- 
dard procedure when entering the Goroth sys- 
tem is to drop out of hyperspace at the “hyper- 
space threshold” — 72 hours travel (at a Space 
movement speed of 4) away from Goroth Prime. 
Use the chart below to determine how long it will 
take a ship to fly to Goroth after dropping out at 


the hyperspace threshold. 
Space Move Hours to Goroth 
1 288 
2 144 
3 96 
4 72 
5 57.6 
6 48 
7 41.1 
8 36 
9 32 
10 28.8 
11 26.2 
12 24 


Brave or foolhardy captains might decide to 
save a little time by flying in closer to Goroth 
Prime before dropping into realspace. Doing so 
represents a very real risk of ionizing the 
starship's controls, however — with unpleasant 
results ifthe shipis required to maneuver or fight 
once it has dropped out of lightspeed. A ship that 
flies within the hyperspace threshold suffers a 
single “attack” inflicting 6D ionization damage 
(refer to the ion cannon rules on page 110 of Star 
Wars, Second Edition to determine the effects of 
this attack). Remember that shields do not pro- 
tect a ship from ionization damage. 

For similar reasons, it is also risky to enter 
hyperspace while within the hyperspace thresh- 
old. Standard procedure is to fly sublight until 
the ship clears the threshold. While a ship does 
not suffer an ionization attack as when flying into 
the system, increase all astrogation difficulties by 
+20. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


19 


Chapter Three: Geolo 


and Geograph 


ARM 
ARS 


E Chapter Three 


Geology and Geography 


Goroth Primeis astandard terrestrial world. It 
has an equatorial diameter of 12,756 kilometers. 
Its mean density is 5.5 (the density of water is 
1.0), implying that it is a rocky world with a 
relatively small nickel-iron core. Its surface grav- 
ity is 0.98 standard — close enough to one stan- 
dard gravity that instruments are necessary to 
measure the difference. 

Goroth Prime’s magnetic field is abnormally 
strong for a terrestrial world. This would make 
little difference except for the fact that its mag- 
netic poles and its axis of rotation are offset by 
almost 20 degrees. This means that, as the planet 
rotates, its magnetic field sweeps through the 
hyperbaride-laden atmosphere and ring struc- 
ture. This leads to significant build-ups of static 
electricity in the atmosphere, particularly in the 
ring. Thus, Goroth is often shaken by lightning 
storms that make electrical discharges on other 
planets look like tiny sparks by comparison. 
Discharges in the ring also affect the environ- 
ment, flooding the planet with electromagnetic 
pulses (EMP). 

Goroth Prime rotates slower than the norm. 
The local day is 36 standard hours in length — 1.5 
standard days. Its year is 300 local days (equiva- 
lent to roughly 450 standard days, or 1.22 stan- 
dard years). Goroth’s axis of rotation is perfectly 
perpendicular to the plane of its orbit; thus, the 
planet experiences no seasons. Day and night are 
of equal length, with no seasonal variation. 


Population 

The planet’s current population approaches 
500 million. Under the auspices of the Colonial 
Governor, an official census is underway to con- 
firm the true figure, which may be up to 5% 
different either way. 

The vast majority of the planet’s population is 
made up of native Gorothites. Bureaucrats, poli- 
ticians, military representatives and support 
personnel making up the Colonial Government 
number 3,650. According to official mega- 
corporate employment rolls, there are some 


15,000 direct corporate employees —as opposed 
to “client-workers” — on Goroth. Since these 
employment rolls are generated for taxation pur- 
poses, it is quite possible that the true number is 
somewhat higher than the “official” figure. 

There are thought to be a small number of 
“client-workers” of other species — perhaps as 
many as 1,000 of them—toilingin the hyperbaride 
cracking plants of Goroth. A Rebel spy recently 
reported seeing two or three Wookies working in 
a “slaving gang.” There are also rumors that 
convicts and political prisoners from other Impe- 
rial-dominated worlds are serving out their sen- 
tences on Goroth. 

Then thereis the military — or paramilitary — 
presence. A full legion of Goroth Planetary Police 
(actually, paramilitary security forces) and their 
support personnel — numbering a total of 7,500 
— is stationed on the planet. At any given time, 
there are also less than a thousand Naval person- 
nel on duty on the planet, as well as crewmembers 
on leave from the two capital ships that remain 
permanently in-system. 

And finally there are out-of-system visitors. 

It surprises some people that the Empire would 
let anyone but Imperial personnel onto a planet 
of such strategic significance and value. In fact, 
however, the Empire can hardly declare Goroth 
off-limits no matter how desirable that might be. 
For one thing, the corporate presence guaran- 
tees that the Empire does not have complete 
control over who comes to and goes from Goroth. 
Corporate employees are constantly being trans- 
ferred to and from Goroth operations. Manage- 
ment delegations and consulting teams frequently 
visit the facilities. Supplies must be delivered, 
and raw materials must be shipped off-planet. 

Almost as importantly, however, the Empire 
wishes to maintain the fiction that Goroth is not 
aslave world. Gorothis a prime example—so the 
Imperial-controlled newsnets trumpet — of co- 
operation between an autonomous system and 
the Empire, to the greater benefit of both parties. 
Declaring the world totally off-limits — effec- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


eee 7 A Rees Chapter Three: Geolo 


-WA 


tively setting it up as a secure Imperial outpost— 
would expose this “mutually-beneficial coopera- 
tion” for the sham that it is. 

Thus there is some limited travel to and from 
Goroth beyond that of corporate, Imperial and 
military personnel. Goroth has no tourist indus- 
try, of course, but there are reasons other than 
tourism for private citizens to visit a world. Much 
business is conducted on Goroth. The credit- 
flow attracts entrepreneurs, businessmen — re- 
spectable and less so — plus the usual assort- 
ment of rogues, con-men and gamblers who can 
smell a quick credit a parsec away. Further, there 
is the potential for a little lucrative “gray-market” 
trading. Most markets on Goroth are under indi- 
rect Imperial and corporate control thanks to the 
nationalization of major industries. Any con- 
trolled market automatically breeds demand for 
goods beyond that control. Of course, smugglers 
are also drawn to Goroth. 


Geology 


Like most terrestrial planets, Goroth consists 
of five different parts. In order — from the out- 
side in — these are the atmosphere, the hydro- 
sphere, the lithosphere, the mantle and the core. 

The atmosphere of Goroth is fairly standard in 
thickness and composition for this type of terres- 
trial world (with some notable exceptions, of 
course). Atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1.1 
standard atmospheres — higher than normal, 
but not exceptionally so. Goroth Prime’s atmo- 
sphere comprises 74% nitrogen and 20% oxygen. 
“Trace” elements include argon, carbon dioxide, 
hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide, methane, and water 
vapor; there are also small but measurable con- 
centrations of hyperbaride compounds. The most 
prevalent of these are ilinium trioxide (0.0002%) 
and vintrium hydride (0.0001%), although there 
are dozens more similar compounds in even 
smaller concentrations. 

Goroth has several seas, all of them small and 
very shallow. In total, water covers only 12% of 
the planetary surface. The average depth of the 
oceans is 300 meters. 

The planet’s crust varies in thickness from a 
few hundred meters — in highly active areas like 
the Yar’En (“Firelands”) and Na’R Ji’Gek 
(“Doomgate”) — to akilometer or two. The upper 
mantle is approximately 100 kilometers thick. 
Compounds of hyperbarides make up less than 
0.001% of the crust and upper mantle, with ilinium 
trioxide being the most common compound. 

The inner mantle is denser and heavier than 
the material above it. It is semi-solid, and rela- 
tively hot (perhaps 1,500° Celsius). The mantle 
extends from the base of the crust to a depth of 
almost 2,800 kilometers. Concentrations of 
hyperbarides are much higher in the mantle, 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


climbing to almost one tenth of a percent! 

The corporations have established several 
pilot boreholes into the mantle to extract the 
hyperbaride-rich material; they are manned by 
Gorothites. The immense technical challenges 
have limited the yield from these projects so far; 
some corporate scientists are projecting signifi- 
cant breakthroughs in the near future. 

The core is divided into an outer shell and an 
inner core. The shell is semi-rigid, and is over 
2,000 kilometers thick. Composed largely of nickel 
and iron, the shell has density of 10.0 —ten times 
the density of water. The inner core is thought to 
consist of the same elements, but at a much 
higher temperature — 7,500° Celsius or so. Even 
at these temperatures, the inner core is solid, 
simply because of the immense pressure it is 
under. The inner core is thought to have a den- 
sity of 13.0. Concentrations of hyperbarides are 
even higher in the core than in the mantle — 
perhaps as high as 0.25% — but with current 
technology it is considered impossible to “mine” 
the core for the valuable elements. 


Tectonic Plates and Continental Drift 


As with many volcanically active terrestrial 
worlds, the crust of Goroth is split into a number 
of tectonic plates which “float” on the mantle. 
Upwellings of warmer and more fluid mantle 
material from deeper within the planet cause 
these plates to move. This is the origin of so- 
called “continental drift.” 

Tectonic movement on Goroth Prime was al- 
ways more rapid than the norm. For one thing, its 
core is more than 1,000° Celsius hotter than 
average for similar terrestrial worlds. For an- 
other, radioactivity — arising from the break- 
down of meta-stable hyperbarides, as well as 
from the decay of more familiar radioactive iso- 
topes — has caused pockets of abnormal heat 
(“hot spots”) within the mantle. 

The result is that convection currents in the 
asthenosphere—which basically “push around” 
the tectonic plates — are stronger than is usual. 

The Scouring destabilized the crust even fur- 
ther, splitting the tectonic plates into smaller 
fragments, each with its own motion. Most tec- 
tonic plates on Goroth move 40 to 80 centimeters 
per year (as opposed to the 5-10 centimeters per 
year range, which is more common for similar 
terrestrial planets); some of Goroth’s plates move 
as much as two meters per year! 


Volcanism and Seismic Activity 
Increased continental drift, of course, leads to 
higher-than-normal levels of volcanic and seis- 
mic activity. Many earthquakes result from tec- 
tonic plates moving against each other. Most 
quakes take place where the edge of one tectonic 


and Geograph 


AR. 
ARS 


and Geograph 


Chapter Three: Geolo 


oA 
J 


% 
4 
f 
A 
3 

5 

7 


IDIBIA ax 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


22 


seme AR HAE Three: Geolo 


-WA 


In the Badlands 


Let me tell you, boy, I’ve seen some pretty 
harsh environments. This Goroth place, it’s 
one of the bad ones. 

It’s dark, see? That’s part of the problem. 
The sun never really cuts through the clouds 
overhead. Middle of the day’s as dim as twi- 
light on any civilized world. Without optical 
enhancers, you can’t see much further than 
you can chuck a rock. Except when the light- 
ning flashes, of course, Then you can see more 
details than you probably want to see. 

Night-time? What do you think, boy? Blacker 
than the inside of a space slug, a lot of times. 
Sometimes the lightning strobes everything 
into sharp relief. Sometimes there’s a kind of 
fire in the undersides of those clouds. But 
sometimes it’s so black you might as well have 
been struck blind. 


plate slides below the edge of another — typi- 
cally along ocean shorelines and mountain ranges. 
“Mid-continental” quakes do occur, however. 

Itis a rare day that passes without at least one 
minor tremor at any given point on the planet’s 
surface. Crust-wrenching “megaquakes” aremuch 
more uncommon, but they certainly do happen. 
Over the past century, the o’beki of Graith has 
suffered three major quakes — “major” meaning 
they were powerful enough to cause serious 
structural damage and significant casualties — 
but no true megaquakes. 

By contrast, a smaller o’beki known as J’Lan 
has suffered two megaquakes in the same period, 
buckling the crust and changing the topography 
of the area, and almost obliterating the settle- 
ment. For obvious reasons, Gorothites have ex- 
tensively researched earthquakes. Even so, the 
science of predicting seismic events is still in its 
infancy. Gorothite experts believe that the en- 
clave of Graith will almost certainly suffer a dev- 
astating megaquake within the next 50 years — 
but the chances that it will occur tomorrow or 49 
years hence are the same. 

From a game standpoint, minor quakes will 
cause no damage to structures, ships, vehicles or 
characters. They can, however, be exceptionally 
unsettling to people not used to them — after all, 
most people expect the ground to stay put — and 
players should take the opportunity to develop 
their characters’ reactions through role-playing. 

Major quakes can be devastating, causing ex- 
tensive damage (structural damage can run any- 
where from 3D character scale damage to 8D 
starfighter scale damage). Normally, characters 
should be able to “dodge” earthquake damage; 
this represents diving out of the way of falling 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


The badlands are scary places to be at the 
best of times. Outcroppings of lava-rock ev- 
erywhere. Black. Harsh. Jagged. Sharp enough 
to tear your envirosuit if you brush against 
them wrong. And there’s something else about 
them. They seem to move in the shifting light. 
Lightning flashes, and you see an outcropping 
a dozen meters away. Couple seconds later, 
another flash — and it looks like it’s less than 
10 meters away. And is that an arm reaching 
out toward you? 

Have you ever walked through a hall of 
statues at night? You know that feeling that 
they're moving when you've got your back to 
them? It’s the same feeling in the badlands. 
Except the statues aren’t of Humans. They’re 
of things that come out of your darkest night- 
mares. 


masonry, jumping yawning crevasses, and basi- 
cally keeping their balance while the world goes 
mad around them. Of course, these damage val- 
ues do not take into account damage from falling 
debris, collapsing structures, explosions, fires 
and all of the other “secondary” damage effects 
of earthquakes. A true megaquake can cause up 
to 10D capital scale damage to structures, almost 
certainly completely devastating communities 
for kilometers around! 

Gorothite architecture takes into account the 
certainty of earthquakes. Gorothite subterranean 
shelters are strong, shored up with many stout 
columns. Their cliff-dwellings are less resilient, 
but still stronger than standard Imperial building 
techniques. Since the Empire and the corpora- 
tions have resettled Goroth, none of the main 
o’bekis have been struck by large earthquakes. 
Thus, the Imperial and corporate personnel have 
little real idea of just how potentially lethal the 
planet is. The pressures that they have built are 
strong, certainly, and do a very good job of 
keeping out the hostile environment, but a large 
quake will probably breach them and a true 
megaquake will shatter them like eggshells un- 
der astormtrooper’s boot-heel. The Imperials do 
not know this, of course, and few Gorothites are 
of a mind to tell them. 

The edges of the tectonic plates are marked by 
many volcanoes. Currently, there are several 
thousand active volcanoes on Goroth Prime. Each 
of these volcanoes goes through periods of activ- 
ity and quiescence; however, each seems to fol- 
low its own cycle, at its own rate. At any given 
time, there are hundreds or thousands of volca- 
noes erupting somewhere around the planet. 
Normally, the material spewed into the atmo- 


and Geograph 


Chapter Three: Geolo 


sphere by so many volcanoes would obscure 
sunlight, turning the planet frigid. In the case of 
Goroth, however, the immense clouds of dust 
generated by volcanoes are the only thing saving 
the planet from a run-away overheating green- 
house effect. The two conflicting trends — global 
cooling and global warming — are more or less 
balanced for the time being. 

Most volcanic eruptions are so-called “quiet” 
events. “Quiet” in this context still means poten- 
tially lethal, of course. During a “quiet” eruption, 
flows of lava pour from the volcano, while clouds 
of gas, particulates and steam are vented into the 
atmosphere. The gas clouds can be poisonous — 
particularly on Goroth, where they contain 
hyperbarides — but the major threat comes from 
the lava flows, which can pour downhillat speeds 
of up to 60 kilometers per hour (equivalent to a 
Move of 21!). Any character or vehicle engulfed 
by a lava flow suffers an attack of 6D speeder 
scale damage each round. Fortunately, quiet erup- 
tions are usually heralded by tremors and minor 
earthquakes, giving sufficient warning to get out 
of the flow-patterns of released lava. 

Explosive eruptions are much more danger- 
ous since they often occur with no warning what- 
soever. An explosive eruption occurs when a 
volcano basically “blows its top.” The concus- 
sion can be as violent as a nuclear detonation or 
an orbital bombardment by Star Destroyers. A 
typical explosive eruption might have the follow- 
ing statistics: 


Blast Radius: 0-1/3/7/10 km 
Damage: 10D/8D/5D/2D (starfighter scale) 


Regardless of how they erupt, volcanoes poi- 


and Geography ==... Bk es 


ARST 


son the atmosphere around them, both with 
hyperbaride salts and with more familiar but 
nonetheless poisonous compounds. Within 100 
kilometers of any volcano, the atmosphere is 
Type Ill. Depending on prevailing winds (in other 
words, depending on the gamemaster’s wishes 
and story necessities), this “dead zone” can ex- 
tend virtually anywhere, even into a Gorothite 
o’beki. 

For rather obvious reasons, there are no 
Gorothite o’bekis near any active volcano. Unfor- 
tunately for the “client-workers,” however, sev- 
eral cracking plants and other facilities are near 
volcanoes since the magma chamber beneath 
the volcano is often an excellent source of 
hyperbarides. 


Geography 

Goroth has several major oceans, and count- 
less lakes too small to show on a planetary map. 
The largest can be found in the western hemi- 
sphere: T’Ples, which can be roughly translated 
from the Gorothite as “Harrowmere,” or “Lake of 
Trials.” 

Second to Harrowmere is the T’Klin S’rek 
(“Firecomb Sea”) — named for the chain of active 
volcanoes that line it to the northwest — in the 
eastern hemisphere. 

The average depth of oceans on Goroth is 300 
meters; in most, however, there are at least some 
deep “holes” or chasms, plunging to depths of 
more than twice that depth. 

The deepest point on the ocean floor is the 
Ulan Bight, in the Ul’Husk Ocean in the eastern 
hemisphere, which is over 1,300 meters deep. 


World in Torment 


Tales tell us of our world as it once was, an 
idyllic garden. The sky was clear, the water 
pure, the breezes gentle. Food was plentiful. 
Life was glorious. Our world heaped bounties 
upon us, like a mother caring for her children. 

Where are those bounties now? 

Dark and sullen, the sky looms and glowers 
above us, hiding the face of the sun. The water 
is fouled; it burns the bellies of our children. 
The winds rip at us, like the claws of a preda- 
tor. The foods we once ate are now death. Life 
is a short respite from death. 

Look, off-worlder. Over there. See the moun- 
tain? See how it gouts fire into the sky? See 
howthe great burning reflects from the clouds, 
turning them the red of your blood? See those 
clouds of ash, of smoke? Clouds of poison, off- 
worlder — deadly poison to you, and no less 
to my children. Watch how the wind carries 


them, like shades of doom passing silently 
across the face of my world. 

Can you smell the taint in the air, even 
through your breath mask? I can. It is sharp, 
piercing, bitter — a smell of death, not just for 
individuals, but for entire species. 

Feel the vibrations through your feet. The 
world shakes and shudders, like a b’del racked 
by fever. Sometimes the shudders become 
convulsions. Mountains fall. Continents shift. 
Chasms open in the ground. Our homes col- 
lapse, are engulfed. 

Rarer now are the spasms which collapse 
the land. But the ground is never still, never 
satisfied with the changes it has wrought. It 
quivers always, reminding us of the past we 
have lost. 

Can anyone tell us what we did to deserve 
this punishment? 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


aun’ AR Chapter Three: Geolo 


-WA 


Storm Season 


Those Navy vacheads think they’re so hot 
with their TIE fighters. Out there in space, you 
can be as sloppy as you like because there’s 
nothing to run into. If you want to try real 
flying, take the controls of an airspeeder and 
take it for a run through the mountains. During 
storm season. At night. You’ll see those 
vacheads’ faces turn as white as a 
stormtrooper’s helmet. 

You're on instruments most of the time, even 
during the day. Visibility’s low, particularly 
downwind of volcanoes or geysers. There’s so 
much garbage in the air you can hear it rattling 
off the airframe. Depth perception’s lousy — I 
know a couple of good pilots who flamed in 
when they took their eyes off their instruments 
and misjudged their altitude. 

The winds are harsh, gusty, and unpredict- 
able. One second you've got a 50-klick 


headwind, the next it’s a 75-klick tailwind, and 
the next it’s a downdraft that wants to slam- 
dunk you like a nega-ball. 

And then there's the repulsorlift instability. 
Even with all the mods to our birds, it’s harsh. 
Lift can fluctuate by 10 percent with no warning 
atall. Thrust, too, but that’s not socritical unless 
you're in close formation. When it really gets fun 
is when you haveasymmetric instability. Ifyou’re 
a millisecond slow in reacting, you're in a cork- 
screw, the ground comes up fast, and you might 
not even have time to punch out. 

You can’t let your attention wander for an 
instant, particularly in the mountains. Our 
orders are to keep to a nice, high altitude — 
but what pilot worthy of the name isn’t going 
to go for a tear through the canyons when 
nobody’s looking? 

That’s what,Lcall,flyi 


oceans are abnormally warm — on aver- 
-22° Celsius. This temperature does not 
significantly with depth, even in deep 
uch as the Ulan Bight, implying that the 
ature is a result of geothermal, rather 
lar, heating. 

re the Scouring, the planetary oceans — 
were much larger than they are today — 
onsiderably cooler, ranging in tempera- 
m perhaps 1° Celsius to 12° or so. When 
an temperatures rose, countless species 
tic life died because they were unable to 
o the rapidly-changing conditions. 

1g temperature was not the only threat to 
life, however. As aresult of the Scouring, 
icant portion of the hydrosphere boiled 
r evaporated. This concentrated salts — 
nrinately sodium chloride, but heavy metal 
icluding hyperbaride salts) were present 
This, too, killed off many aquatic species 
ivedin salt concentrations of 3% but were 
ed by salt concentrations of 12%. 

aer, Many more compounds were being 
iced into the oceans as a result of the 
d strikes. Volcanoes spewed hyperbaride- 
va flows that eventually cooled in the 
— but not before some of the salts they 
ed dissolved in the water. “Hard rain” 
tated particulates out of the atmosphere, 
s rivers which leached even more poisons 
e tortured lands. These streams and riv- 
ried their burdens of heavy metals and 
oxins into the oceans. 

eare several dozen species of aquatic life 
ve adapted to the harsh conditions in the 
_Allof these have evolved ways of filtering 


Slave of the Empire 


out the poisonous contaminants, often concen- 
trating the hyperbaride salts into hard shells or 
exoskeletons. 


Mountains 

There are many high mountain ranges on 
Goroth Prime. The highest peaks can be found in 
the “girdle” of mountains that surrounds the 
o’beki of Graith. The mountain known as M’Nis 
(“Skyfang” in the Gorothite tongue) soars to an 
altitude of 8,100 meters, and there are half-a- 
dozen other peaks in the region almost as lofty. 

For some reason, the mountains of the west- 
ern hemisphere are not as tall as those of the 
eastern. On the other side of the planet from 
Graith, the highest peak is known as Teldanus 
(“Overlook”), with a height of 7,350 meters. 


‘Volcanic Badlands” 


Large areas on Goroth Prime are categorized 
as “volcanic badlands” — like the Yar’En 
(“Firelands”), west of Graith — which combine 
the worst features of deserts and volcanic plains. 
These volcanic badlands are rugged expanses of 
lava-rock where nothing grows. Black, rough and 
striated with deep chasms and knife-edge ridges, 
the badlands are almost unbelievably ugly and 
daunting. Formed by the upwelling of lava from 
vents in the surface or from impact craters, they 
are typically characterized by rock so rough and 
harsh that the jagged protrusions will cut through 
the soles of any footwear but specially-made 
“rock boots.” 

In some isolated places, however, the black 
lava rock is smooth as polished marble, creating 
the impression of pools and waterfalls frozen 


25 


and Geograph 


— 


The 
age, l¢ 
chang 
holes : 
tempe 
than s 

Befe 
which 
were (€ 
ture fr 
the oc 
of aqu. 
adapt 

Risi 
aquati 
a signi 
away c 
predor 
salts (i 
as well 
that th 
poison 

Furt 
introd 
astero! 
rich la 
oceans 
contail 
precip 
formin 
from tl 
ers Ca 
other t 

The 
that he 
oceans 


Gorotr 


Chapter Three: Geolo 


Mike Vilardt 


and Geograph 


forever into black solidity. Here, for whatever 
reason, the upwelling lava cooled more rapidly 
than normal, thus avoiding the jagged, almost 
crystalline surface typical of the badlands. 

The rock of the badlands is hotter than normal 
rock. It ranges in temperature from warm to the 
touch, to hot enough to sear flesh on contact 
(approximately 25° to well over 100° Celsius). 
Because of this heat, the air above the black rock 
roils and shimmers with convection patterns. 
Powerful “thermals” — upwelling columns of 
heated air — represent additional risks to atmo- 
spheric flight over badlands. The air over bad- 
lands is considered Moderate difficulty terrain 
for flying vehicles. 

Hotsprings bubble to the surface in some re- 
gions of the badlands. The water — highly con- 
taminated with poisonous metals — ranges in 
temperature from 30° orso to boiling. Geysers — 
either continuous plumes of steam, or periodic 
fountains of boiling water — are also relatively 
common. 


Polar Caps 


Even 4,000 years after the Scouring, the effects 
of the bombardment have not fully run their 
course. The average surface temperature on 
Goroth Prime is still climbing by a degree or two 
every few decades. As aresult, the planet’s polar 
ice-caps are shrinking and will continue to shrink 
for many years into the future. 

The water from the melting ice caps has to go 


ARS™ 


somewhere, of course. At the moment, it forms 
“polar oceans” — bodies of water that surround 
the ice caps. As the melting continues, these 
“polar oceans” will certainly spread. 


Climate 


The Scouring has drastically changed the cli- 
mate of Goroth. The world has warmed dramati- 
cally. Clouds constantly hide the sun, and violent 
lightning storms lash the mountains. 

On the equator, at sea level, the average day- 
time high temperature is 35° Celsius, dropping to 
12° at night. Since the planet's axis is perpendicu- 
lar to the plane of its orbit, there is no seasonal 
variation. This temperature drops relatively 
steadily with altitude — approximately 7.5° for 
each additional 1,000 meters. 

The average temperature declines as one ap- 
proaches the poles. At the heart of the polar 
caps, the average daytime high hovers around 
freezing, with nighttime lows plunging to -30° 
Celsius, or even lower. Wind chill drops the 
effective temperature even further — perhaps as 
low as -50° or -60°. 

Cloud cover is unbroken; the sun doesn't shine 
directly on the surface of Goroth Prime, bathing 
the world in a continual twilight during “day.” 

Precipitation is highest near the equator. Av- 
erage annual rainfall on the equator is 250 centi- 
meters. In the enclave of Graith, an average of 
only a dozen days go by ina year without at least 
some rainfall, Nearer the poles, the average an- 


Ia SAE Ne 
SRR ase 


ke 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


a AR Chapter Three: Geolo 


-WA 


nual rainfall drops to 50 centimeters. 

In the mountains, windstorms are common. 
Their violence often comes as a terrifying sur- 
prise of off-worlders. Wind-shear, microbursts 
and high-velocity gusts that can exceed 120 kilo- 
meters per hour make atmospheric flight through 
the mountains a frightening and dangerous expe- 
rience. During a windstorm, add +2D to the diffi- 
culty number for any roll involving flying move- 
ment. Lethal windstorms can blow up with al- 
most no warning. Among the taller mountains, 
windstorms are an almost daily occurrence. 


The Ring 


The ring that surrounds Goroth Prime is so 
tenuous that it is almost invisible. Only when it is 
backlit by the day-side of the planet can it beseen 
clearly. Unlike a true asteroid field, Goroth’s ring 
is composed of countless tiny particles, the larg- 
est not much bigger than a grain of sand. This 
makes it impossible to “fly between them.” Any 
ship that flies into the ring at any significant 
speed will be “sandblasted” by the particles. 
While the ship will probably not suffer serious 
damage, sensors and shields will take a beating, 
greatly reducing their effectiveness until circuits 
are replaced. 

The ring is a flattened torus (a donut-shape), 
many times wider than it is thick. The inner edge 
of the ring is about 1,000 kilometers above the 
surface of the planet, and the ring extends out to 
about 3,000 kilometers above the surface. In 
contrast, the flattened torus is perhaps 10 kilo- 
meters thick at its thickest point. The ring is 
aligned with the planet's equator. 

The ring material carries an immense static 
charge. As the concentration of material shifts, 


sometimes titanic static discharges — like im- 
mense lightning bolts — arc from one part of the 
ring to another. The largest of these bolts create 
enough of an electromagnetic pulse to ionize the 
controls of ships within the ring (6D ionization 
damage). 

Sometimes the pulses are strong enough to 
penetrate the atmosphere and wreak havoc with 
unshielded systems on the planet below. Ve- 
hicles that are not specifically shielded to deal 
with conditions on Goroth suffer an attack of 6D 
ionization damage (speeder scale) when one of 
these discharges occurs. 

Small static discharges in the ring are an al- 
most constant event. In any given hour, there are 
probably adozen or more small discharges some- 
where in the ring, but they are small enough to be 
harmless (even if their appearance is spectacu- 
lar). 

On average, a major bolt will occur some- 
where in the ring every 10 days or so. Also on 
average, any given spot on the equator of the 
planet will be flooded with an electromagnetic 
pulse once every one and a half local years or so. 

It is important to note that the o’beki of Jerev 
(in the eastern atmosphere) is close enough to 
the equator to suffer from periodic electromag- 
netic pulse discharges. Inthe western hemisphere 
the o'bekis of Moren and A’Lenba are in the 
affected zone. The Empire built a spaceport at 
A'Lenba before the realities of the ring’s dis- 
charges were fully understood. If the Imperials 
could do it again, they would certainly choose 
another site for one of the planet’s major space- 
ports. Fortunately, Graith, the planetary “capi- 
tal,” is far enough north of the equator to be 
unaffected by the pulses. 


and Geograph 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


27 


Chapter Four: The Environment 


AR 
ARS 


EE Chapter Four 


The Environment 


Long-lasting consequences of the asteroid 
bombardment continue to complicate life on 
Goroth Prime for natives and off-worlders alike. 
Off-worlders must always take precautions when 
traveling outside any of the corporate or Imperial 
pressures. 

The Goroth environment has a way of turning 
minor lapses of judgment into tragedies. On an- 
other world, for example, a traveler forced down 
in the wilderness by a malfunctioning airspeeder 
would have a reasonable chance of “living off the 
land” until help arrived. On Goroth the crash 
survivor would bein real trouble. Not only would 
he not be able to breathe the air, drink the water 
or eat the local life-forms, but he might also have 
great difficulty summoning help. It is not a wise 
idea to travel the wilds of Goroth without de- 
tailed planning. 


Atmosphere 


The air of Goroth Prime is contaminated with 
a wide range of potentially-toxic compounds. 
Most of these are particulates — in other words, 
dust particles composed of hyperbaride com- 
pounds and other materials. Around active vol- 
canoes, however, the air contains poisonous 
gases as well as particulates. 


In O’bekis 


Around Gorothite o’bekis, the atmosphere is 
classed as “Type II” — in other words, simple 
breath filters are sufficient for off-worlders. In 
Type ll areas, the only poisonous components of 
the atmosphere are particulates that can easily 
be filtered out. Breath masks range in price from 
50 credits to over 500 credits. The only major 
difference is that the more expensive models 
typically last longer between filter replacements: 
20 hours as opposed to one hour for the cheaper 
units. 

Off-worlders can survive within Type II areas 
without breath masks for short periods. For each 
hour (or portion) that a non-Gorothite breathes 


Type Il air without a filter, reduce his Strength by 
one pip. The symptom of this loss is a feeling of 
progressive weakness, like exhaustion but more 
pernicious. When a character's Strength is re- 
duced to zero, he dies. Pips lost to atmosphere 
exposure return naturally once the character is 
back in good air (at a rate of one pip every four 
hours; this rate is doubled if the character is 
under the care of another character who makes 
a Difficult first aid roll). 

Native Gorothites do not suffer this effect 
because of their innate resistance to 
hyperbarides. 

Within corporate and Imperial pressures, of 
course, the air is Type I: safe to breathe without 
any precautions whatsoever. 


In the Wilderness 


The situation is quite different outside the 
o’bekis, of course. Over the centuries, the 
Gorothites have made great advances in purging 
their immediate environment of at least some of 
the toxins. Beyond the o’bekis, however, those 
toxins still remain. 

Outside o’bekis, the atmosphere is classed as 
Type Ill. Here, the particulates are still present, 
but they are joined by poisonous gasses. Simple 
breath masks will remove the particulates, but 
they can do nothing about the gases, many of 
which diffuse through the skin. Off-worlders must 
wear fully-sealed envirosuits to totally avoid the 
effects of a Type IIl atmosphere. 

The Type III atmosphere has two distinct ef- 
fects on off-worlders. The first is a result of the 
particulates, and is the same as for Type Il atmo- 
sphere within the enclaves: for each hour (or 
portion) that a character breathes in the particu- 
lates, he loses one pip from his Strength. This 
effect can be countered by a breath filter. 

The gases in the atmosphere have another 
effect, however. For each hour (or portion) that 
a character’s skin exposed to these gases, he 
loses two pips each from his Dexterity and his 
Perception. The symptoms of these losses are 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


DN AR Chapter Four: The Environment 
RE Cn 


-WA 


disorientation, nausea, vertigo, blurred vision, 
tremors, and cramps. If any of these attributes 
reach zero, the character dies. Lost pips are 
recovered as described in the section above. 
This effect can only be countered by a full, sealed 
envirosuit. A breath mask provides no protec- 
tion against these poison gases. 

Note that these effects are independent. A 
character who breathes Type III atmosphere 
through a breath filter will not suffer the conse- 
quences of the particulates — in other words, he 
will not lose pips from his Strength — but he will 
lose pips from his Dexterity and Perception (with 
the standard symptoms) due to the poisonous 
gases. Thus, a breath mask is better than noth- 
ing, but is not enough to keep a character alive for 
long. 

Native Gorothites are unaffected by particu- 
lates, but are affected by the poisonous gases. A 
Gorothite who enters a Type III atmosphere with- 
out an envirosuit loses one pip from his Dexterity 
for each three hours he is exposed. He regains 
lost pips at a rate of one per hour. Thus, a 
Gorothite will eventually die if exposed to Type 
Ill air, but nowhere near as quickly as an off- 
worlder would. 


The Polar Caps 
As a result of the planet’s weather patterns, 
the air over the polar caps is almost as clear of 
contaminants as that within the o’bekis. On the 
ice-caps, the atmosphere is classed as Type II. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Hydrosphere 


Goroth’s hydrosphere, too, is poisoned: 
oceans, rivers and springs, as well as the rain 
itself. Water from different sources contains dif- 
ferent concentrations of contaminants, however. 


Oceans and Springs 


Today, the oceans are brews of highly poison- 
ous toxins. If an off-world, carbon-based life-form 
drinks unfiltered ocean water, he immediately 
suffers 6D damage. The symptoms of this dam- 
age are wracking cramps, burst blood vessels, 
and fever. 

The water is toxic even to most native species, 
although not quite as lethally so. A native 
Gorothite suffers 4D damage when drinking unfil- 
tered ocean water. 

Relatively simple filters will completely remove 
the toxins, although nothing can be done to re- 
move a disgusting metallic taste from the water. 
Boiling will not make the water safe to drink. An 
effective personal filter — about the size of a man’s 
fist — costs 50 credits, and can process 100 liters 
of water before becoming useless. Larger and more 
expensive filters can handle greater volumes. All 
corporate and Imperial pressures have extensive 
filtering plants, of course, and all but the smallest 
Gorothite settlements have filters. 

Water that bubbles up from natural hotsprings 
(in the volcanic badlands and elsewhere) is gen- 
erally just as toxic as ocean water. 


f 


ANA 


Dan & David Day 


Rain 

The cleanest water on the planet is rainwater 
that has not yet had the chance to pick up con- 
taminants from the ground. As always, “clean” is 
only relative: rainwater does precipitate out con- 
taminants from the atmosphere itself, becoming 
“hard rain.” An off-worlder suffers 3D damage 
from drinking unfiltered rainwater; a native 
Gorothite suffers only 1D damage. Again, filters 
can render the water harmless, but boiling it is 
useless. 


Rivers and Streams 


Most rivers carry rainwater from the slopes of 
the mountains down to the oceans. As it passes 
over the riverbeds, the run-off picks up further 
contaminants from the land. Most river water is 
less poisonous than ocean water, however: off- 
worlders suffer 4D+2 damage from drinking unfil- 
tered river water, while native Gorothites suffer 
2D+2 damage. A few streams are fed by hotsprings 
and are just as lethal as the oceans. 


Ice Caps 


Although few visitors realize it, there is a 
source of almost uncontaminated water: the po- 
lar ice-caps. If a character digs down a couple of 
centimeters into the ice-cap and melts the ice 
found there, the resulting water will be almost 
pure, inflicting “only” 1D damage to off-worlders 
and no damage at all to native Gorothites. 


Radiation 


Hyperbaride contamination is enough of a 
problem, but it is not the only one. The mantle of 
Goroth Primeis richin more familiar radioactives, 
and the hammer-blows to the crust have spread 
many radioisotopes across the surface of the 
planet. The level of beta and gamma radiation on 
the surface and in the atmosphere is not enough 
to cause short-term damage to off-worlders. Long- 
term exposure — on the order of years or de- 
cades —is another story; it’s why off-worlders all 
live in sealed and shielded pressures. For their 
part, the native life-forms have developed an 
innate resistance to this level of radiation. 

Unfortunately, the radiation does have an ef- 
fect on certain kinds of technology: specifically, 
repulsorlift drives and the sophisticated com- 
puters that form the “brains” of droids and other 
autonomous machines. 


Repulsorlift Operation 
Standard repulsorlift vehicles become ex- 
tremely unstable in the atmosphere of Goroth 
Prime. Add a penalty to the difficulty of any 
movement roll. Roll randomly on the table below 
to determine the added penalty: 


Chapter Four: The Environment «=== BA Wes 


ARS 
Roll (on 1D) Added Difficulty 

1 +5 

2 +10 
3 +15 
4 +20 
5 +25 
6 +30 


This added difficulty represents the power 
surges, drops and fluctuations caused by the 
radiation. For a character who is unaware of this 
hazard, the gamemaster should allow an Easy 
repulsorlift operation test the moment he fires up 
an unmodified repulsorlift vehicle to recognize 
that he will be at serious risk flying the thing. 

Repulsorlift engines can be modified to resist 
these fluctuations. These modifications are very 
extensive and exceptionally expensive. A pre- 
modified vehicle will cost double the standard 
price — for example, 13,000 credits for a modi- 
fied Ikas-Adno Nightfalcon speeder bike. 

Characters might decide to make the neces- 
sary modifications themselves. This requires a 
Difficult repulsorlift repair test, and takes a mini- 
mum of one day. The cost for parts is 35% of the 
vehicle’s normal new cost. Complicating factors 
— for example, lacking the proper tools — can 
add +5 to +20 (or even more) to the difficulty of 
the task, depending upon the gamemaster’s dis- 
cretion. 

A suitably modified repulsorlift vehicle ne- 
gates the difficulty modifiers for movement rolls. 
However, these modifications are so extensive 
that they significantly change the operation of 
the vehicles. In other words, a modified 
repulsorlift vehicle drives very differently from 
an unmodified model. To reflect this, the 
gamemaster should always apply an “unskilled” 
penalty of -2D, as described on page 98 of Star 
Wars, Second Edition. Anyone piloting the vehicle 
without the correct specialization suffers the-2D 
penalty. As a matter of course, all Imperial and 
corporate pilot personnel on Goroth will be spe- 
cialized in the modified versions of repulsorlift 
vehicles. 


Droids 


The radiation flux on Goroth Prime causes 
untold damage to the mental processes of un- 
modified droids. For each three hours that a 
droid is outside a shielded area (like a corporate 
pressure), it loses 1D from each of its Knowledge, 
Mechanical and Technical attributes. For “sen- 
tient” droids, including droid characters, the 
“symptoms” of these losses are disorientation, 
confusion, absent-mindedness, and wild swings 
of “pseudo-emotions.” The sensations are excep- 
tionally disturbing, and no droid will willingly 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


expose itself to them without a very good reason. 
When any attribute reaches zero, the droid is 
“hung” — totally catatonic, incapable of taking 
any action until repaired. 

Unlike living characters, droids do not “heal.” 
Once a droid has lost dice from its attributes, it 
can only regain them by being repaired. This 
repair can be difficult and time-consuming, how- 
ever, since each of the three classes of circuitry 
affected — equating to Knowledge, Mechanical 
and Technical attributes — must be repaired 
separately. The difficulty for each depends on 
the number of dice lost: 


Dice Lost Difficulty Repair Cost* 
up to -1D Easy 5% 
up to -2D Moderate 10% 
-3D or more Difficult 20% 


* Based on percentage of “new” cost 
Time taken: One hour, then three hours, then 
24 hours. 


Like repulsorlifts, droids can be shielded 
against the radiation flux. This is very expensive, 
however. A pre-modified droid costs four times 
the listed price: thus, a modified fifth-degree 
droid costs 4,000 credits, while a modified R2 
astromech droid costs 18,100 credits! It is this 
price differential that makes the use of “client- 
workers” much more economical on Goroth 
Prime. 

Fortunately, characters can do the modifica- 
tions themselves. This requires a Moderate droid 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


repair roll, and takes a minimum of one day. The 
cost for parts is 250% of the droid’s original 
“new” cost. Complicating factors, such as lack of 
proper tools, can add +5 to +20 (or even more) 
modifiers to the difficulty, at the gamemaster’s 
discretion. 

A modified droid does not lose dice due to 
radiation. 


Communications 


Because of the radioactive contaminants in 
the atmosphere, standard comlinks are ineffec- 
tive on Goroth Prime. In fact, their effective range 
is decreased by a factor of 250, depending on 
ambient conditions! Thus, a standard vehicle 
comlink will havea range of 800 meters (normally 
it has a range of up to 200 kilometers), while a 
personal unit will have an effective range of only 
200 meters (normally it has a range of up to 50 
kilometers)! 

Unlike other forms of technology such as 
repulsorlift vehicles, there is no simple “techno- 
logical fix” to overcome this problem. Where 
long-range communication is absolutely required, 
“Jand-lines” must be used: shielded fiber-optic 
lines. Characters will often have to go to existing 
land-line stations. 

If fiber-optic lines are established, there is no 
range limitation. Theoretically, one station could 
communicate, without distortion, to another sta- 
tion on the other side of the planet assuming an 
unbroken land-line link exists. Of course, this 


Chapter Four: The Environment 


Mike Vilardi 


Chapter Four: The Environment «=.= BAA Ws 


also means that cutting off communication is just 
a matter of snipping a few fiber-optic lines. 

This has a significant effect on spaceport op- 
eration. Obviously, incoming starships are not 
connected to a spaceport’s control tower by 
communication lines. Thus, an incoming ship 
cannot communicate with the ground — or vice- 
versa — until it reaches an altitude of less than 
one kilometer! Pilots used to being “talked down” 
by the control tower will feel pretty lonely on 
their first approach to Goroth Prime. 

As aresult, there have been many “near misses” 
between ships on approach and/or landing pat- 
terns — the Colonial Governor's office keeps the 
actual number confidential — but as yet there 
have been no mid-air collisions. 


Natural Resources 


These, of course, represent the reason why 
the Empire and now the Rebel Alliance have 
turned their attentions to Goroth Prime. While 
Goroth is a source for “strategic” heavy metals 
such as iridium, platinum and osmium, it is the 
hyperbarides that make the planet so valuable. 

For many centuries, scientists have known of 
“super-heavy” hyperbarides that were as stable 
as more common elements, but possessed cer- 
tain chemical and physical properties that made 
them unique. They are seldom found naturally, 
and are often synthesized from more common 
elements through an intricate and very expen- 
sive process requiring great temperature ex- 
tremes, pressures and raw energy. 


ARS 


Hyperbarides came to be used in many high- 
energy applications because they could with- 
stand higher temperatures, flux densities and 
levels of radiation than standard materials. Be- 
cause of these qualities, hyperbarides are an 
important part of the high-yield turbolasers used 
by the Empire in its heavy capital ships and 
ground installations. Without a steady supply of 
hyperbarides, Imperial weapons manufacturers 
would have to rely on inferior materials. 

The Empire has several hyperbaride synthe- 
sis plants on worlds throughout the galaxy. For 
strategic reasons, their locations are closely- 
guarded secrets. These synthesis plants are ex- 
pensive to run, however. A source of naturally- 
occurring hyperbarides — like Goroth Prime — 
represents an immense cost savings. 

There are a dozen or so strategically signifi- 
cant hyperbarides. The most important are the 
elements ilinium, vintrium, maranium, frasium, 
and hollinium. Pure hyperbarides are immensely 
valuable. A kilogram of pure frasium, for ex- 
ample, is worth one million credits or more to the 
right buyer. Compounds of hyperbarides, such 
as ilinium trioxide, are less valuable, but still 
worth significant sums of money: 250,000 credits 
or so per kilo. This value is a significant “draw” 
for smugglers throughout the Mid-Rim. 

Obviously, it is in the Empire's best interest to 
keep a very tight lid on hyperbaride smuggling. 
Ships entering and leaving the Goroth system are 
subject to extensive searches and scans. 


ee 


32 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—STA 
-WA 


E Chapter Five 
The Gorothites 


There is one sentient species native to Goroth 
Prime, known to exobiologists simply as 
“Gorothites.” In contrast, the Gorothites refer to 
themselves as “B’Dellyi” (singular “B’Del”), or 
“The People.” 

As intelligent species go, the Gorothites are 
relative “newcomers,” having achieved sentience 
less than a million years ago. In evolutionary 
terms, then, they have diverged less than the 
norm from related, but less intelligent and non- 
sentient species also native to Goroth. 


Biology 


Anatomy 


Gorothites are tall, broad humanoids, about 
2.2 meters tall on average, with shoulders pro- 
portionately much broader than an average Hu- 
man. A full-grown adult will mass about 150 kilo- 
grams. Females are slightly larger, on average, 
than males. The deviation between individuals, 
however, is greater than the average difference 
between genders. 

Gorothites appear to be reptilian, with an 
elongated and slightly-flattened snout. They have 
sloping forehead. Their brain cases are large, 
bulging out and back at the rear of the skull. The 
positioning of their eyes provides true binocular 
vision. 

Gorothites have several “wattles” beneath their 
chins. These appear to be simply loose flaps of 
skin; however, by tightening certain muscles in 
their necks, Gorothites can cause these wattles 
to distend, almost like a pouch under the throat. 
The skin of the wattles is tattooed in complex, 
helical designs of bright colors. These tattoos 
denote ancestry and status within Gorothite so- 
ciety, as well as identifying to which j’ber (roughly 
translatable as “clan” or “extended family”) the 
individual belongs. 

Protected under protruding ridges of bone, 
Gorothites’ eyes are relatively small, almost 
“beady” in appearance. Evolved under much 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


brighter daylight than the Human norm, these 
eyes’ diamond-shaped pupils can contract to the 
size of a pin-point in an instant. Thus, Gorothites 
are less susceptible than many other species to 
the dazzling effects of bright lights or sudden 
flashes. When the creatures are out under the 
skies of Goroth, their pupils are dilated so much 
that the surrounding iris — which is a bright and 
striking green in most individuals — is almost 
invisible. 

They have no external formations surround- 
ing their ears. Their timpani (ear-drums) are 
flush with the skin, about three centimeters in 
diameter. Gorothites have an excellent sense of 
hearing, much more sensitive than Humans’, al- 
though loud and sudden noises are very painful 
for them. 

Gorothite are diurnal. They typically sleep for 
12 hours each day, during the long Goroth night. 
At need, however, they can go for several local 
days with no sleep whatsoever. 

A Gorothite can open its jaws very wide — 45° 
or more. It has the teeth of an omnivore— sharp, 
knife-like cutting incisors in the front, and flat, 
grinding pseudo-molars further back. This shows 
the creatures’ ancestry. They evolved from om- 
nivores, and were omnivores themselves until 
the Scouring. Only since then have the Gorothites 
become pure herbivores. Gorothites’ mouths are 
used only for eating. 

They have four small nostrils, in the center of 
their forehead, between their eyes. These nos- 
trils lead into a complex system of sinuses in the 
front of their skull, and thence to the trachea 
(which is separate from the esophagus along the 
whole of its length). These sinuses are filled with 
sensory nerves, which give the Gorothites a very 
acute sense of smell. 

Gorothites speak by creating a resonance in 
their sinuses; they have no “voice-box” as such. 
When they speak their own language, their voices 
are dry and clicking, and their nostrils visibly 
close and open to create stops and plosives (“p,” 
“b,” “k” and similar sounds). When they speak 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites 


Mike Vilardi 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites 


NE 


SQN 


Basic, their voices are thin and reedy, with very 
pronounced stops and plosives. (Acommoncom- 
plaint is that talking face-to-face with a Gorothite 
is like getting sneezed on repeatedly!) The 
Gorothite language evolved completely indepen- 


pe" 


ait! 
Ñ 


A Ram 
ARST 


dently of other languages, so the inherent diffi- 
culty for non-Gorothites to understand it is Diffi- 
cult (see pages 76-77 of Star Wars, Second Edition 
for more information on the languages skill). 

A Gorothite’s skin is knobby in appearance, 
and mottled in color, ranging in hue from muddy 
brown to dirty green, with black markings here 
and there. These markings are as distinctive to 
other Gorothites as fingerprints are to Humans; 
to most Humans, all Gorothites look very much 
alike. Although it looks as though it should be 
hard and rough to the touch, their skinis actually 
very soft, with a texture reminiscent of velvet. 
Their normal body temperature is above Human 
norm — 40° Celsius, to be precise — and their 
skin feels warm and dry to the touch. 

Gorothite arms are disproportionately long, 
and well-muscled near the shoulder, but becom- 
ing more slender toward the hands. They have 
two “elbows,” both of which are fully double- 
jointed (A Gorothite has no difficulty whatsoever 
scratching the center of its back ...). 

Their hands are long and slender, with five 
triple-jointed digits. They have two opposable 
“thumbs,” one on each side of a narrow palm. 
Their three fingers are dexterous, and well-ener- 
vated. Their sense of touch is more sensitive 
than an average Human’s. This has a down-side 
as well, however: their fingers are very sensitive 
to pain, and Gorothites are cautious about touch- 
ing anything that might hurt them. 

Their legs, in contrast, are disproportionately 
short, and bow-legged to the point of appearing 
bandy. Their feet are broad and squat, with three 
thick digits. The soles of their feet are protected 
by calluses so hard as to resemble bone. 

Despite their size, and their visible muscula- 
ture, Gorothites are on average weaker than 
Humans. This is a consequence of the different 
(and less efficient) chemical makeup of their 
muscles. They also have considerably less 
stamina. Gorothites are quicker-moving than 
Humans, however — suprisingly “light on their 
feet” and agile for creatures of their size and 
mass. 

Gorothites are more resistant to heat than 
Humans, able to function comfortably in ambient 
temperatures of up to 50° Celsius. They are more 
sensitive to cold than Humans, however. Tem- 
peratures that would be comfortable for Humans 
— between 15° and 25° Celsius — are uncomfort- 
ably cold for Gorothites. Thus, Gorothites do not 
relish any time they must spend within corpo- 
rate or Imperial pressures. It is a point of per- 
sonal honor to endure these temperatures with- 
out complaining, however, and without wearing 
additional clothes. 

Gorothites usually wear simple robes, rather 
like shifts, woven from synthetic fabrics. They 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


i AR ț Chapter Five: The Gorothites 


-WA 


prefer muted “earth-tones” (browns, blacks, light 
reds and so forth), although some individuals 
wear brighter colors as a kind of personal “fash- 
ion statement.” Style and color of garb is totally 
unconnected to personal or j’ber status. In fact, 
it took the Gorothites considerable time to un- 
derstand even the concept of a uniform — and 
the fact that minor differences in garb denote 
gradations of rank and status — and even today 
few can easily distinguish an off-worlder’s rank 
by looking at his uniform. Conversely, most 
Gorothites cannot understand how off-worlders 
can be insensitive to the fine gradations of status 
denoted by their own wattle tattoos! 

Gorothites normally go barefoot, except when 
walking on the knife-edged lava rock of the volca- 
nic badlands. Here they wear thick-soled sandals 
made of a resilient synthetic material similar to 
duraplast. 

Although it is not strictly necessary, most 
Gorothites wear simple breath masks when they 
leave their o'’bekis. These filters are more to 
eliminate the foul smell from the air than to 
remove contaminants. Since Gorothites breathe 
through the four nostrils between their eyes, 
their masks will not fit Humans or most other 
humanoids. Conversely, Gorothites cannot use 
standard-issue Human breath masks without 
extensive modifications. 

Apart from the minor size difference, there is 
no real visible distinction between male and 
female Gorothites. Their wattle tattoos make 
gender immediately apparent ... to Gorothite 
eyes, at least. 


Nutrition 


Far back in their evolutionary history, “pre- 
Gorothites” were predatory carnivores. As they 
climbed the evolutionary ladder toward sen- 
tience, however, they became omnivores. Since 
the Scouring, however, they have become pure 
herbivores. 

Gorothites have no understanding of the “meal- 
times” given so much significance by Humans. A 
Gorothite will tend to “graze” throughout the 
day, eating small amounts every hour or so, 
rather than sitting down to two or three distinct 
meals. Eating has none of the emotional or social 
significance that it does for Humans — it is 
viewed as “fueling the body,” no more, providing 
no more pleasure than breathing. Few Gorothites 
can grasp how such a basic biological function 
can be hedged round with such bizarre tradi- 
tions by other cultures. Feasts, dinner parties 
and family dinners have no place in Gorothite 
society. In fact, some Gorothites are mildly of- 
fended by the “salacious” (to them) attention 
Humans and other species pay to eating in pub- 
lic. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Like some herbivores, Gorothites have two 
stomachs — a small “rumen” and a larger “main 
stomach.” This paradigm is common to many 
native Goroth Prime life-forms. This is because a 
Gorothite’s digestive apparatus is not very effi- 
cient. When food is swallowed, it is initially kept 
in the rumen for several hours of “pre-digestion.” 
During this time, the Gorothite will frequently 
regurgitate some of the food and chew it again, 
exposing it once more to saliva. Further, a 
Gorothite will sometimes spit a wad of partially 
pre-digested food into his hand, and knead it in 
his palm, before re-ingesting it. This is just a fact 
of life for Gorothites; they cannot understand 
how Humans and others can find such a natural 
action as distasteful or disgusting. Regurgitating 
and kneading food in the presence of another is 
actually a sign of trust, and thus something of a 
compliment. It implies, of course, that the 
Gorothite trusts the other not to steal the pre- 
digested food from his hand. 

If a Gorothite fears she will be without food for 
some time, she can stuff both her rumen and 
main stomach with food, then regurgitate and 
process the “stock” over three or four days. 

Gorothites do not cook or otherwise prepare 
the mosses that make up their diet. The concepts 
of seasoning, spices and condiments are alien to 
their way of thinking. In their subterranean shel- 
ters and their cliff-dwellings, Gorothites grow 
these mosses on the walls of their living areas. 

Gorothites enjoy a resistance to the 
hyperbaride contamination in their food; this 
does not mean that they require hyperbarides to 
survive, however. Gorothites can subsist per- 
fectly well on Human foodstuffs, and those eaten 
by other carbon-oxygen-based life-forms (they 
just might not enjoy the flavors and textures). 


Reproduction 


Although they appear to be reptilian, 
Gorothites are closer to mammals in terms of 
reproduction. They are viviparous (they give 
birth to live young) and both the female and male 
parent lactate. The sound of a young Gorothite 
crying stimulates lactation in adults, regardless 
of whether the crying child is the adult’s biologi- 
cal offspring or not. Within family groups, all 
adults participate in feeding and nurturing chil- 
dren. 

Sexual activity is an intensely personal and 
private thing for Gorothites; next to nothing is 
known about Gorothite mating practices, al- 
though it is believed that, like eating, mating is 
purely a biological matter with no special signifi- 
cance. 

The gestation period is averages about 200 
local days (about 300 standard days). This pe- 
riod can vary by as much as 5%. Multiple births 


Mike Vilardi 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites 


are unheard-of. The birthing process is also an 
intensely private affair. A female will give birth 
completely alone; even the biological father is 
excluded. Fortunately, complications are excep- 
tionally rare in Gorothite childbirth. After giving 
birth, a female Gorothite is incapable of conceiv- 
ing for about one local year (450 standard days). 

Children are greatly treasured; any adult 
Gorothite would gladly give his or her life to 
protect a child. The high infant mortality that 
followed the Scouring was incredibly traumatic 
to the Gorothites. 

The ideas of marriage and monogamous rela- 
tionships are unheard of on Goroth. Gorothites 
interbreed within their j’ber clan structures. To 
breed with a member of another j’ber brings 
immense shame on the individuals and both 
clans, and is thus exceptionally rare. 

When exobiologists first realized this fact, 
they were amazed: would this behavior not lead 
to the reinforcement of recessive and dangerous 
genes? It was only after much study that the 
scientists realized that, with some notable ex- 
ceptions — including the genes for hyperbaride 
resistance — such deleterious reinforcements 
are actually weeded out by a very efficient ge- 
netic “error-checking” mechanism. It is interest- 
ing and important to note that this “error-check- 
ing” occurs only during the reproductive cycle: 
specifically, during the first four cell divisions 
after the fertilization of a zygote. Beyond this 
period, the Gorothite genetic code is susceptible 


A Romm 
ARST 


to mutation. It is thought that this mutation 
process is the major mechanism through which 
variation is brought into the racial gene pool. 


Maturity and Aging 

Newborn Gorothites are helpless: blind, al- 
most totally deaf, and incapable of coordinated 
movement. Without protection and nurturing 
from their parents and other members of the 
j'ber clan group, they would surely perish. 
Gorothites are “weaned” and start eating solid 
food at the age of one and a half to two local years 
(two to three standard years). This is mainly a 
cultural matter. Exobiologists believe that a young 
Gorothite could subsist on solid food at an age of 
one standard year. 

Gorothite males mature by the age of 10 Goroth 
Prime years (12 standard years), while females 
mature by age 12 (equivalent to 14 standard 
years). Culturally, they are considered adults — 
with all the concomitant rights, privileges and 
responsibilities of “B’Pen” (“Majority”) — at 13 
local years (15 standard years). Only inthe rarest 
of cases — and at the risk of great family disap- 
probation — will a Gorothite mate before reach- 
ing the age of B’Pen. 

Once they are sexually mature, Gorothites 
show no outward signs of aging for several de- 
cades. Thus it is impossible to judge an adult 
Gorothite’s age by her appearance unless one 
can decipher her wattle tattoos. 

When an individual reaches the age of about 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


dT AR ț ater Five: The Gorothites 


-WA 


105 local years (126 standard years), however, a 
Gorothite undergoes rapid change. Within a span 
of five or six local years, a Gorothite’s skin fades 
to a dusty gray, dries out, and starts to flake and 
crack painfully. Various creams and unguents, 
made from certain mosses, can relieve this pain 
for a time. Eyesight starts to deteriorate, and the 
Gorothite quickly becomes deaf. A Gorothite’s 
legs becomemore bandy, posture begins to stoop, 
and muscle mass deteriorates. 

By the age of 115 local years (138 standard 
years), a Gorothite will typically have lost 10% of 
his or her mass and an equal proportion of height. 
At the age of about 115 local years, a Gorothite’s 
mental processes start to undergo serious dete- 
rioration. Left by himself or herself, a Gorothite 
would die of old age by 120 local years (144 
standard years). 

Aging Gorothites are not left on their own, 
however. A cultural tradition of euthanasia ex- 
ists, an “easing of The Way.” When a Gorothite 
feels his mind starting to go, he will summon his 
j’ber for a final celebration. Together, all mem- 
bers of the j’ber will celebrate his strengths and 
achievements, each one reciting at length how 
the individual’s presence has enriched his or her 
own life. This is a joyful occasion, a time of great 
gladness, love and high-spirits. At the height of 
the celebration, the old Gorothite is givena “trav- 
eling cup” — a draught of poison — by those 
closest to him within the family. With his family 
standing around, he dies a painless death, “walk- 
ing The Way to the next life.” For an entire day, 
the celebration continues; then the body of the 
deceased is cremated and his ashes scattered to 
the winds with great honor. 

Gorothites see this tradition as the culmina- 
tion of a life well lived. The thought of dying 
alone, not surrounded by a loving family, is a 
terrible one for any Gorothite. 


m Gorothites 
Attribute Dice: 12D 
DEXTERITY 1D+2/5D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D/4D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D/4D 
PERCEPTION 2D/4D 
STRENGTH 1D/2D+2 
TECHNICAL 1D/3D 
Special Abilities: 
Skill Bonus: At the time the character is created only, the 
character gets 2D for every 1D placed in the bargain, 
search and cesa skills. 
Hyperbaride Immunity: As discussed in the section on the 
environment, Gorothites are less affected by the contami- 
nants in the air, water and food of their world. 
Smell: Gorothites have a highly developed sense of smell, 
getting +1D to their search skill when tracking by scent. 
This ability may not be improved. 
Story Factors: 
Family Bonds: Gorothites havea strongly-developed sense 
of family honor, Any action taken by (or against) an indi- 
vidual Gorothite reflects on the entire family. Gorothites 
would rather die than bring dishonor to their family. 


Parental Instinct: Adults instantly respond to the cries of a 
young Gorothite, whether the child is a part of their family 
or not. They are driven to protect the child, even if this 
puts themselves at extreme risk. 

Enslaved: Although the Colonial Government uses the 
term “client-workers,” the Gorothites are effectively slaves 
of the Empire. Gorothites are officially restricted to their 
world. Attempting to leave Goroth Prime is a crime pun- 
ishable by imprisonment. A Gorothite who has managed 
to escape the planet is considered a “fugitive from justice” 
by the Empire, to be incarcerated and returned to Goroth 
Prime if caught (if the Imperial forces who find her have 
the time and inclination to do so). Gorothites are consid- 
ered a very minor problem and do not receive the same 
“attention” as a fugitive Wookiee would. 

Move: 10/13 

Height: 2.0-2.5 meters 


Psychology 


Gorothites are natural survivors — otherwise 
they would have died out soon after the Scour- 
ing. They are mentally resilient. While they are 
emotionally sensitive and as sentimental as other 
species, and certainly suffer fear and despair, 
they are undaunted by these emotions. Once a 
Gorothite has decided that a goal is worth attain- 
ing, she will soldier on toward that goal regard- 
less of the obstacles in her way. The greatest 
“sin” in their mind-set is giving up or setting aside 
a task when the going gets difficult. Phrases like, 
“When the going gets tough the tough get going” 
are untranslatable into the Gorothite tongue ... 
merely because they are completely axiomatic, 
and thus unquestionable. 

Interestingly, there is a strange undercurrent 
in the species’ psychology that some sociolo- 
gists have labeled “fatalism.” This is not quite 
accurate — perhaps “a belief in predestination” 
is closer to the mark — but it is very difficult to 
describe this world-view. “Hope” is an alien con- 
cept to Gorothites. If a task is worth performing 
— ifthe goalis worthy — then a Gorothite will set 
himself to completing that task, regardless of 
whether he has any chance of success ... even if 
his own death is a foregone conclusion. lf the task 
is truly worthy, then a Gorothite is undaunted by 
the prospect of his own death, unswayed by 
either hope or despair. If asked to put this con- 
cept into words, a Gorothite might explain that 
the gods have decreed that his people be tried in 
the forge of adversity, and thus that it is just that 
they face that adversity undismayed. 

This does not mean that Gorothites are always 
hurling themselves into hopeless and quixotic 
quests. If the Scouring has taught the species 
anything, it is to be coldly pragmatic. Before a 
goal or course of action can be judged worthy or 
unworthy, all possible consequences must be 
weighed. Only ifthe consequences of success are 
obviously better than those of failure, or of inac- 
tion, will the task be undertaken. This explains 
why the Gorothites as a whole have not flung 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


37 


themselves headlong into rebellion against the 
corporations and the Colonial Government. While 
freedom from oppression is a desirable goal, 
most Gorothites realize that the consequences 
could be the extermination of the entire species. 

Not all Gorothites will agree on the worthiness 
or unworthiness of a particular goal or task, of 
course. There is as much personal variation 
among Gorothites as among any other sentient 
species. Thus the difference in approach be- 
tween the two major resistance groups, the 
Gor'Jen’Ar and the T’B’Dellyi’Mai. The leader- 
ship of the Gor’Jen’Ar believe that militant action 
will bring about extinction, while those of the 
T'B'Dellyi’Mai believe there is something to be 
gained for the species as a whole by terrorism, 
though it will probably cost the terrorists them- 
selves their lives. 


Society 


Family and Interpersonal 
Relationships 

J'ber, or “family” (more accurately, “clan fam- 
ily”) is central to the society of the Gorothites. A 
Gorothite j'ber is a group of individuals con- 
nected by bonds of blood and honor. 

At the height of the Gorothite civilization (be- 
fore the Scouring) these “extended families” 
tended to be very large, with hundreds, thou- 
sands, or even tens of thousands of individuals. 


Chapter Five: The Goroth ites === 8 A ee 


ARS 


Whole towns or cities were occupied exclusively 
by a single family. Traditionally, there was al- 
most no mixing of blood-lines between different 
j’ber and different settlements. Sometimes a por- 
tion of one family would move on from the family 
holding —beit city, town, or large farming “croft” 
— to establish another settlement elsewhere. 
Settlements composed of the same family line 
would typically remain in close communication 
with each other. 

In the early days of Gorothite society, holdings 
occupied by different families would have little 
contact with each other. J'ber kept to them- 
selves. Sometimes rivalries would develop, and 
from time to time small-scale warfare would break 
out between different family holdings. All in all, 
however, warfare was rare. The Gorothites were 
— and remain — less territorial than many other 
sentient species. Territory and wealth are much 
less important than j’ber ties and honor. 

Things began to change in the millennium 
before the Scouring. Contact between different 
families began to increase as the overall stan- 
dard of living on the planet rose. With the intro- 
duction of more advanced technology, larger 
industries began to develop, and this necessi- 
tated an increased level of contact between dif- 
ferent families and different holdings. 

For several decades, this increased contact 
led to an escalation in rivalries between j’ber and 
holdings, and warfare became more frequent. 
Eventually, however, the generally pacific out- 


Mike Vilardi 


EE A cesa game in progress. 


38 Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


— T A R‘ alter Five: The Gorothites 
WARS -n 


look of the Gorothite species allowed their soci- 
ety to settle down with a new and different equi- 
librium. 

Certain families began to specialize. While one 
j’ber might concentrate on energy production — 
a growing issue as the civilization became more 
technologically advanced — another might fo- 
cus its efforts on developing communications 
systems. Other j’ber concentrated on scientific 
research, while still others focused on food pro- 
duction. One family — the j’ber J'Kek — concen- 
trated on what might be called “politics”: build- 
ing contacts and alliances between other fami- 
lies. 

Over the centuries — and under the benevo- 
lent guidance of the Old Republic’s Bureau of 
Acculturation — the influence and stature of 
j’ber J’Kek increased until, almost unbeknownst 
to anyone else, it had emerged as a de facto 
planetary government. All other families recog- 
nized that in j’ber J'Kek was concentrated the 
most influence — and power — on the planet. 
Although some families resented this at first, 
such was the Gorothites’ innate sense of pragma- 
tism that they quickly came to accept the status 
quo. 

With an effective planetary government, j’ber 
retained their traditional concentrations and 
specializations. J'ber P’Tel, for example, remained 
dominant in food production, while anyone inter- 
ested in conveying cargo from one city to an- 
other would be well-advised to contact j’ber 
D’Reb. 

Gorothites rejected the notion of “democracy” 
as it was commonly practiced — they acknowl- 
edged the J’Kek as the rightful leaders in the field 
of inter-j’ber relations and “laws.” It is for this 
reason that members of j’ber J'Kek — the tradi- 
tional “political specialists” — led the planetary 
government for many generations, up until the 
Scouring itself. 

During this period, some old traditions did 
start to break apart, however. While the pro- 
scriptions against breeding across j’ber lines still 
existed, the large, monolithic j’ber holdings be- 
gan to fragment. Larger cities emerged, made up 
of sub-groups from thousands of j’bers. In areas 
other than politics, traditional specializations 
also began to fade. Competition began to emerge, 
and the Gorothites quickly learned the value of a 
free-market economy — and, incidentally, be- 
came sharp traders and negotiators. 


The Hammer Falls 


With the Scouring, Gorothite civilization fell 
apart and many j’bers ceased to exist. Others 
were fragmented, seemingly forever, as cities 
and towns were swept from the planet, and com- 
munications between holdings failed. One of the 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


families that was totally wiped out was j’ber 
J’Kek. Many Gorothites blamed — rightly or 
wrongly — the greed and ambition of Rel’Kan 
J’Kek D’rith Kalama for the fate that befell their 
world. Even now, Rel’Kan J’Kek is viewed almost 
as a being of evil incarnate, and one of the most 
venomous insults in the Gorothite tongue is to 
accuse someone of being tainted with “the blood 
of the J’Kek.” 

Survivors of the cataclysm banded together 
out of necessity: tiny fragments of once-huge 
families, and individuals who were the sole heirs 
of once-proud bloodlines. For the centuries after 
the Scouring, constraints against the mixing of 
bloodlines were set aside. The only alternative 
seemed to be eventual extinction. Yet again, 
Gorothite pragmatism overcame tradition. New 
j’bers were formed from fragments and individu- 
als of other j’bers, and they took new names, 
Once the birthrate began to climb again, how- 
ever, and once the species’ survival no longer 
seemed in such doubt, the old traditions came 
back into force, and remain in force today. 

Communication between the different o’bekis 
was non-existent at first. In fact, many enclaves 
believed that they represented the last footholds 
of intelligent life on the planet. Eventually, how- 
ever, communication between o’bekis was re- 
established. 

Within individual o’bekis, the political situa- 
tion tended to mirror the status quo before the 
Scouring. Individual j’bers had become the ruling 
parties, simply by establishing strong connec- 
tions and alliances between differing j’bers. Once 
communications were re-established between 
o’bekis, much the same thing happened on a 
global scale. The “ruling families” of individual 
enclaves established connections among them- 
selves, and eventually a single j'‘ber emerged as 
the effective “planetary government.” To this 
day, that family — j’ber D’Trel, based in the 
o’beki of Graith — retains what serves for power 
in the Gorothite political system. 


The Present Day 


J'ber is still the most important facet in any 
Gorothite’s life. This is reflected by the species’ 
naming convention, The j’ber name is always 
given first, indicating precedence. This is fol- 
lowed by a “matronymic” — a name that indi- 
cates who the individual’s mother was (before 
the Scouring, this second name was a patro- 
nymic, indicating an individual’s father). Finally 
comes the individual’s personal name. Thus, the 
name D'Trel B’Far Talis identifies the individual 
as one Talis, offspring of B’Far, of j’ber D’Trel. 

On the matter of names, many Gorothites 
recognize that their names are hard for off- 
worlders to remember and pronounce. Some 


An 
ARS 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites 


” lead a recalcitrant Gorothite to a slave-labor work camp. 


“Gops, 


EE Goroth Planetary Police, known as 


[PLEA OW 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


40 


ee eee 


-WA 


Gorothites will take nicknames that they believe 
— often mistakenly — will be easier for off- 
worlders to recall. Thus, D’Trel B’Far Talis might 
be known among those off-worlders who slave 
beside him as “client-workers” as “Before Talis.” 

Before the Scouring, j’bers were traditionally 
patriarchies. The eldest male in any sub-unit of a 
family would be the leader of that group, and all 
others would defer to him. J’bers as a whole 
would have a leader, the oldest male still living in 
the j’ber’s ancestral holding. When inheritance 
became an issue — not often, except for names, 
because of the j’ber structure — patrilineal in- 
heritance was culturally dominant. 

The “gender polarity” of authority has changed 
since the Scouring. No Gorothites know why 
although some ethnologists wonder whether it 
might be a result of blaming Rel’Kan J’Kek — a 
male — for the Scouring. Today, all families are 
matriarchies and inheritance is matrilineal. Be- 
cause of the fragmentation of j’bers and the 
destruction of most ancestral holdings, the tradi- 
tion of an overall j’ber leader has largely been 
lost. 

Individually, a Gorothite will defer to any mem- 
ber of his or her j’ber who is older. If there are no 
members of one's j’ber around, a Gorothite has 
the choice — but not the obligation — of defer- 
ring to any older Gorothite, regardless of j’ber. In 
practice, younger Gorothites will almost always 
be polite and show at least some deference to 
their elders, regardless of j'ber. This will rarely 
extend to obedience, however, outside of one’s 
own j’ber. 


KJi'Kur (“Beholding”) 

Gorothites have a tradition that they refer to 
as K’Ji’Kur, or “beholding,” which is similar in 
some ways to a Wookiee “life-debt.” If one 
Gorothite helps another in a major way, to his 
own detriment, the individual so helped might 
declare that she is K'Ji Kur to the other. This is 
like a one-time debt, which the individual who 
has declared the K'Ji’Kur owes to the other, to be 
repaid in kind at the first opportunity. This “re- 
payment” of the K’Ji’Kur may, but does not have 
to, extend to the individual giving her life for the 
one to whom she is K’Ji’Kur. 

It is important to note that it is always an 
individual’s choice whether or not to declare a 
K’Ji’Kur. No one can ever be forced to do so, and 
a K’Ji’Kur declared under duress is not binding. 
Still, an individual who does not declareaK’Ji’Kur 
when it is apparent to others that she “should” 
do so is shamed and that shame extends to her 
j’ber. Thus, Gorothites will almost always defer 
to “peer pressure” on this issue. 

A K’Ji’Kur does not have to be declared at 
once, so individuals will often take the issue to 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


the matriarch of their j’ber for advice, then follow 
her suggestion. 

K’Ji’Kurs are not declared within a single j’ber, 
but only between individuals of different j’bers. 
Members of the same j’ber are considered, to 
some extent at least, to owe an “innate K’Ji’Kur” 
to all family-members anyway. A Gorothite will 
very rarely declare a K’Ji’Kur to an off-worlder, 
and only if he personally believes the debt is 
immense. There is no family shame in not declar- 
ing a K'Ji’Kur to off-worlders. 


Religion 

Before the Scouring, the Gorothites had sev- 
eral religions, the basic tenets of which were 
largely compatible despite contradictory cre- 
ation myths and the like. Pre-Scouring Gorothites 
were as non-territorial with regard to “philo- 
sophical real estate” as they were to terrain and 
these religions co-existed peacefully. Religion 
was each individual’s personal business, and 
none of these faiths advocated conversion. 

Members of a single j’ber sub-group usually 
(but not always) shared the same religion, al- 
though different groups within the same j’ber 
were sometimes drawn to different faiths. The 
most popular religion at the time combined a 
limited pantheism with the concept of transmi- 
gration of souls. Members of this faith believed 
that they had lived many lives before this one, 
and that their current incarnation on Goroth 
Prime was a reward for right action in previous 
incarnations. Remember, at this time Goroth 
Prime was a “garden spot.” They were also taught 
that a fiery “netherworld” awaited those who 
transgressed in this life. 

The old faiths were among the many things 
obliterated by the Scouring. When the survivors 
emerged into an environment that reminded them 
all too much of the mythical netherworld, they 
re-examined their beliefs. What sins could the 
entire world have committed that would con- 
demn everyone to this place? 

Inthe decades immediately after the Scouring, 
the old tradition ofj’ber specialization reemerged 
in one interesting area: that of religion. The ma- 
triarch of one small j’ ber — the V’Sook, limited at 
the time to the enclave of Graith-announced that 
she had finally come to understand the 
Gorothites’ place in the universe. Calling her 
philosophy M’Nes, or “True Faith,” she taught 
that the Gorothites were being tested. The entire 
species was being tried in the crucible of suffer- 
ing and pain. Enduring would strengthen the 
B’Dellyi — not only in body, but also in spirit — 
to the point where the gods would judge them fit 
and worthy to transcend to an existence even 
more wonderful and fulfilling than the paradise 
they shared before the Scouring. 


This transcendence can only be achieved as a 
species, V’Sook M’Alra Vin claimed, not by indi- 
viduals. Either all Gorothites would transcend, 
or none would. The entire B’Dellyi must face 
steadfastly the travails that beset them and en- 
dure patiently. Only through patience — and the 
justice of the gods — could the Gorothites hope 
to move on. 

M’Nes spread rapidly. Perhaps it should not 
have been surprising how many people took to 
this new “religion.” After all, it provided a spiritu- 
ally-satisfying answer to the great question of 
why the gods would inflict such great suffering 
on the B’Dellyi. Many Gorothites found it easier 
to accept the Scouring as a kind of divine test, 
rather than as a senseless catastrophe. 

Over the centuries since the Scouring, the 
religion as first preached by V’Sook M’Alra Vin 
has spread across Goroth Prime, becoming more 
or less the central planetary religion. Most 
Gorothites have been exposed to its tenets at 
some point in their lives, either as part of their 
upbringing or later in life. This does not mean 
that all Gorothites fully believe it or accept it, 
however. Some have taken it completely to heart 
and base their lives on it. Others deny it vehe- 
mently, decrying it as the ultimate abdication of 
personal responsibility. Most Gorothites fall 
somewhere in the middle, however, giving the 
faith little thought in their day-to-day lives, but 
falling back on it as a kind of spiritual touchstone 
when they need reassurance and courage. 

The j’ber V’Sook remains the M’Nes Brin (“Re- 
ceptacle of the True Faith” ). All females of the 
j’ber are “Mothers of the True Faith” — K’Kela 
Mey; priestesses by another name. 

From the “birthplace of the Faith” —the o’beki 
of Graith — the V’Sook j’ber has spread to all 
other o’bekis on the planet. In every Gorothite 
settlement, there is a “Sanctuary of the True 
Faith” — M’Nes K’Lar, a small building where 
anyone, whether an adherent of the religion or 
not, is free to come and meditate in peace and 
quiet. The K’Kela Mey are always available for 
personal counseling sessions, where they offer 
advice and spiritual support to those who are 
troubled or in need. K’Kela Mey also speak at 
regular J’Nes B’Sar (“Truth Gatherings”), where 
members of the religion come to listen to words 
of spiritual comfort and support. The priestesses 
use these J’Nes B’Sar to reinforce the tenets of 
their religion — that patient endurance, and 
submission to the “tests” declared by the gods 
are the only routes to transcendence. 

The M’Nes is an important facet of Gorothite 
life. The K’Kela Mey — and the V’Sook j'ber as a 
whole — are very influential across the planet. 
While supposedly staying out of politics —“avoid- 
ing base distractions,” according to the V’Sook 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites aqussss i A Ree 


ARS 


matriarch— actually the V'Sook j’ber has the ear 
of many P’Dar’ Ken’Al (council-members) as well 
as the P’Dar Ib’Al (local council-members) in the 
various o’beki governments. 

These P’Dar’Ken’Al recognize that j’ber V’Sook 
wields a significant amount of temporal power 
arising from their spiritual influence. After all, 
there are some Gorothites who take every pro- 
nouncement from the K’Kela Mey as absolute, 
incontrovertible truth. There are many others 
who are not so vehement in their belief, but are 
still influenced by the faith’s teachings. The 
P’Dar’Ken’Al recognize that they could not hold 
power if the V’Sook so much as hinted to the 
faithful that the councilors were no longer wor- 
thy of leading the populace. This recognition 
takes various forms, of course. Some councilors 
fear that being removed from office by a popular 
ground-swell would put an end to the good they 
can do for their community. Others fear for the 
loss of personal privilege and status it would 
entail. 

For these reasons, even though they have no 
official place in government, members of j’ber 
V’Sook are actually very influential in the politi- 
cal sphere. 


Imperial Involvement 


This fact has not been lost on the Colonial 
Government. Governor Limoth recognized early 
on that the central tenet of the M'Nes — “submit 
patiently to the trials that beset you, or you will 
decrease the chances for all B’Dellyi of achieving 
transcendence” — is just the message that he 
would like to send out to the Gorothite popula- 
tion. 

After all, if rebelling against one of the “tests” 
sent by the gods — in this case, the Imperial 
occupation — is a sin against the entire species, 
then would peer pressure not help to keep mal- 
contents in line? 

Subtly, the Colonial Government has been sup- 
porting j'ber V’Sook and M’Nes. Governor Limoth 
is quietly funding the V’Sook, allowing them to 
build new and larger sanctuaries. M’Nes has been 
granted tax-free status, and priestesses pay per- 
sonal tariffs at lower rates. In the “client-worker” 
barracks associated with certain Imperial facili- 
ties, rules against public meetings have been waived 
exclusively for J’Nes B’Sar (this has led to certain 
resistance cells trying — with various degrees of 
success — to disguise their meetings as “Truth 
Gatherings”). And, whenever Colonial Governor 
Limoth makes public appearances or vidnet-broad- 
cast speeches, he is very careful to speak rever- 
ently and respectfully of M’Nes. 

In return for these “concessions,” the K’Kela 
Mey openly denounce resistance movements like 
the Gor’ Jen’Ar—and especially the T'B’Dellyi’Mai 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


— T AR Chapter Five: The Gorothites 
So ee 


-WA 


— as sinners who are compromising the chance 
for all B’Dellyi to transcend. It is important to 
note that some members of j'ber V’Sook are fully 
aware of what is going on and that they are 
implicitly supporting, and even collaborating 
with, the Empire for their own personal benefit. 
Many members of thej'ber, however, are not this 
cynical ... or realistic, depending on one’s point 
of view. They truly believe in their religion, and 
they see the Colonial Governor's cooperation 
with the M’Nes Brin simply as proof that “The 
Truth” can be recognized and respected by off- 
worlders as well as Gorothites. 

It would be easy to conclude that members of 
the resistance movement must be apostates, or 
atheists. Certainly, many K’Kela Mey decry them 
as heretics and sinners! In fact, however, there 
are many resistance operatives and sympathiz- 
ers who believe in the central tenets of M’Nes. It 
is just the interpretation of those tenets with 
which they disagree. The Imperial occupation is 
definitely a test set before the B’Dellyi by the 
gods, the resistance members believe ... but how 
is one supposed to pass that test? By submitting 
passively? Or by overcoming the obstacle by 
fighting the Empire? Both courses of action can 
be viewed as “facing the challenge,” but which 
choice will lead the species to transcendence, 
and which will bar them forever from the next 
level of existence? Thus, while membership in 
the resistance is incompatible with the rigid or- 
thodoxy perpetuated by j'ber V’Sook, it is not 
necessarily incompatible with beliefin the tenets 
of M'Nes. 


Species Personality 


It is often simplistic — and dangerously mis- 
leading — to stereotype or “pigeonhole” an en- 
tire species in terms of personality. For example, 
the stereotypical description of Humans might 
include brashness, rampant individualism, anda 
tendency to act before thinking. Yet there are 
many Humans who do not fit this categorization: 
who are self-effacing, good team-players, and 
often paralyzed by second-thoughts when a deci- 
sion has to be made. 

Such is the case with other species as well, 
including the Gorothites. The B’Dellyi are not 
quite as unpredictably variable as Humans, but 
still they show a great range of individuality. 
Even so, many off-worlders — specifically, many 
corporate and Imperial personnel — seem to 
subscribe to a simplistic, “If you’ve met one 
Gorothite, you've met them all” attitude. 

There are certain factors present in the per- 
sonality of most Gorothites. They are a tradition- 
ally thoughtful people. Most Gorothites would 
rather err on the side of thinking too long before 
taking action — of over-analyzing consequences 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


and alternatives — than on rushing into some- 
thing unprepared. In general, however, they are 
pragmatic enough to recognize that, sometimes, 
a decision simply has to be made even if all the 
information is not yet in. 

Intelligence is highly valued: not necessarily 
“book-learning” and education, but the nimble- 
ness of mind necessary to analyze novel situa- 
tions and put familiar facts together in new ways. 
This is not to say that learning is denigrated, 
however. Education is valued, but the ideal re- 
mains a combination of knowledge and supple 
intellect. 

Logic puzzles — tests of mathematical and 
spatial reasoning, acrostics and a local variation 
on the concept of crosswords — are extremely 
popular; children are taught to work simplified 
versions of these puzzles before they can read. 
Gorothites cannot see the attraction of “trivia 
games” — involving nothing more than recalling 
unconnected facts on cue — that so intrigue 
many Humans. Neither do they seethe attraction 
of most forms of gambling, since the luck element 
almost always overwhelms whatever skill is in- 
volved. 


Cesa 


A popular one-on-one game is called cesa, 
played with ornately-carved pieces moved around 
a 10-by-10 array of alternately-colored squares. 
The rules, mainly relating to how different pieces 
can move, are relatively simple, but years of 
dedication are necessary to learn how to play 
well. The vast majority of Gorothites play cesa 
(at one level or another), approaching it as any- 
thing from a hobby to an absolute, all-encom- 
passing obsession. Cesa leagues and ladders ex- 
ist in all o’bekis, and even within the “client- 
worker” barracks of Imperial facilities. Soon after 
the Imperial occupation, the Colonial Governor 
experimented with broadcasting top-rank cesa 
games over the vidnet (hoping, theoretically, 
that the Gorothites might be too busy watching 
the games to plot rebellion). The plan fell flat. To 
Gorothites, there was no attraction whatsoever 
in watching two others play agame of cesa; all the 
pleasure comes from actually playing oneself. 
Thus, even when two local cesa masters are 
squaring off for a game in a neighborhood kefa 
house, no Gorothites will go out of their way to 
watch the match. This attitude extends to all 
sports. 

Gorothites never expect off-worlders to be 
able to play cesa and are pleasantly surprised to 
encounter a stranger who has bothered to learn 
the game. One of the best ways for an off-worlder 
to quickly earn a Gorothite’s respect is to beat 
him in a game of cesa. 


Cesa 


Cesa is a Perception-based skill. 

Time Taken: A few minutes to several hours 

This skill is used to play the game of cesa, to 
understand its mechanics, and to talk intelli- 
gently about the game. When a character plays 
cesa with another, make opposed rolls using 
both characters’ cesa skill. Note that the gam- 
bling skill does not cover cesa. 


Humor 


Most Gorothites are thoughtful and introspec- 
tive. They never laugh or smile — their anatomy 
simply does not permit it—and many off-worlders 
assume they have no sense of humor. In fact, they 
havea strong cultural sense of humor, but it runs 
along different lines from that of other species. 
Slapstick, pratfalls, practical jokes, “shock” or 
obscenity-based humor are simply not funny toa 
Gorothite. Instead, the species’ humor is quite 
formal and cerebral —“dry,” to most off-worlders 
— revolving around multi-level puns and word- 
play (much of which cannot be translated into 
Basic), logical ambiguities, and what might be 
called “humor of the absurd” (“dueling non se- 
quiturs,” as one Ithorian once described it). 

The culture makes a very strong distinction 
between subjects where humor is appropriate, 
and those where it is not. Inappropriate levity is 
shocking, and sometimes interpreted as an in- 
sult. A Gorothite would never make a joke in the 
face of imminent doom, as might a Human. 


Friendships 


Gorothites tend to develop extensive networks 
of friends, within their own j’ber and outside it, 
that extend throughout the o’beki where they 
live. As communication channels between en- 
claves proliferate, so do links in these “friend- 
ship trees.” Most Gorothites are wary about es- 
tablishing friendships with off-worlders simply 
because they assume that all “aliens” are part of 
the Empire that oppresses them. 

Once they come to grasp the concept that an 
individual off-worlder is not part of the Empire — 
a galaxy-trotting gambler, a smuggler, or a Rebel 
agent, for example — Gorothites have no in- 
grained problem with accepting him or her into 
their friendship tree. 

Gorothites see friendship as a strong and re- 
ciprocal bond. If a friend asks for a favor, you are 
entitled to grant it. Of course, a friend will never 
ask for something you are not able or willing to 
grant, since doing so would overstep the bounds 
of friendship. Off-worlders often cannot under- 
stand why Gorothites are not more frequently 
taken advantage of by “friends.” The reason is 
simple to the B’Dellyi: one who tries to take 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites «= BAA Decne 


ARST 


advantage is no longer a friend, and thus not 
worthy of any concessions whatsoever. Friends 
keep no secrets from each other — none at all. 
Conversely, nothing (short of torture) will con- 
vince a Gorothite to reveal to non-friends some- 
thing told in confidence by a friend. 

Gorothites enjoy spending time in the pres- 
ence of friends and family. They do not share the 
fixation many species have with “small talk,” and 
talking just to “fill space.” If there is nothing 
important to say, Gorothites will say nothing. 
When friends get together — perhaps over a mug 
of kefa, a local beverage — they will often sit for 
minutes or hours without speaking, enjoying a 
comradely silence. A Gorothite aphorism encap- 
sulates it well: “The words of a friend's heart are 
spoken in silence.” 


Motivations 


In general, Gorothites are not motivated by 
the desire for and the acquisition of wealth. They 
are not acquisitive and they cannot understand 
why anyone would become obsessed with con- 
spicuous consumption or why anyone would 
respect or envy such a display. Happiness does 
not come from possessing items — so the 
Gorothites believe. Satisfaction comes from 
within — from the spirit — and how does the 
possession of inanimate objects have any effect 
on that? The keys to happiness are self-worth 
and self-esteem, so claim the Gorothites. 

These tenets are reflected in all facets of 
Gorothite life. Even the richest and most influen- 
tial natives on the planet live in spartan warrens, 
caves or cliff-dwellings, with next to no furniture, 
and no works of art or status symbols to distin- 
guish them from the poorest and least influential. 

For large portions of the species’ cultural his- 
tory, in fact, there was no currency in use. “Com- 
merce” at the time was more or less on the barter 
level, with the “planetary economy” comprised 
ofahideously-complex net of interrelated obliga- 
tions, K’Ji’Kurs, debts and favors. 

“Wealth,” to a Gorothite, is identical to “self- 
value” or “self-worth.” According to the Gorothite 
world-view, self-worth is bolstered by the re- 
spect of others, and by the influence one wields. 
Not power, as such, but influence — and there is 
a major difference. Power is enforced from with- 
out; if you have power, people give weight to your 
words mainly to avoid the consequences that 
would arise if they did not. Influence, however, is 
internal; if you have influence, people give weight 
to your words voluntarily because they respect 
you. The greater one’s influence in society and 
the further that influence spreads, the more im- 
portant and the “wealthier” one is. Thus, the 
matriarch ofj’ber V’Sookis arguably the “wealthi- 
est” Gorothite on the planet. The president of the 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Taani ooo ee 


P’Dar’Ken, though she has more power, has less 
influence than she, and so is less “wealthy.” 

Things are starting to change, however. The 
Imperial occupation is beginning to “corrupt” 
some Gorothites. For the first time in their spe- 
cies’ history, the Gorothites are seeing the appli- 
cation of true power, as opposed to influence, 
and some natives are starting to covet it. New, 
too, is the realization that personal wealth — in 
the monetary sense— sometimes confers power. 
Again, as a pragmatic people, there are some 
Gorothites who are beginning to take these twin 
realizations to heart, and are starting to explore 
how they can turn the new system to their per- 
sonal benefit. For the first time, some Gorothites 
are starting to acquire and treasure possessions 
that reflect this new hierarchy of power. 


Politics 


The key native “governing body” is the 
P’Dar’Ken. Democratically elected, this comprises 
the Rel’Kan (president) and 12 P’Dar’Ken’Al (coun- 
cil-members). The Rel’Kan serves a five-year term, 
while the P’Dar’Ken’Al serve four-year terms. 
Elections for the P’Dar’Ken’Al are staggered, with 
half the P’Dar’Ken coming up for re-election each 
two years. This is to avoid the chaos of a major 
transition; there will always be six P’Dar’Ken’Al 


with at least two years of experience in govern- 
ment. There are no limits on the number of terms 
a Rel’Kan or P’Dar’Ken’Al can serve. Elections are 
direct, with each Gorothite getting one vote, 
conducted electronically. 

For the last five years, the Rel’Kan of the 
P’Dar’Ken has been D’Trel B’Rar Jok. The Rel’Kan 
votes on the P’Dar’Ken only to break a tie. Her 
main duty is to chair meetings, and to act as 
intermediary and liaison between the P’Dar’Ken 
and the Colonial Governor. 


Local Councils 


Each o’beki on the planet has its own P’Dar’Ib 
(“local council”), established along the same lines 
as the P’Dar’Ken. The only exception is the “capi- 
tal” of Graith; the P’Dar’Ken is considered to 
“double” as the P’Dar'lb for this o'beki. Local coun- 
cil-members are P’Dar’Ib’Al. 

Officially, the P’Dar’Ib are subordinate to the 
P’Dar’Ken. On a world where the native govern- 
ment actually had some real power and influence, 
there would undoubtedly be constant wrangles 
over the division of authority and responsibility 
between the different levels of government. Since 
all Gorothite government officials are nothing but 
figureheads, it hardly matters. 


D'Trel B’Rar Jok 


Type: Gorothite Politician 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 

Dodge 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 


Bureaucracy 5D, bureaucracy: Goroth Prime 7D, survival 5D, 


willpower 5D+1 

MECHANICAL 2D+1 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 4D+2, cesa 5D, persuasion 4D+2 
STRENGTH 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Special Abilities: 


Hyperbaride Immunity: Gorothites are less affected by the con- 


taminants in the air, water and food of their world. 


Smell: Gorothites have a highly developed sense of smell, getting 


+1D to their search skill when tracking by scent. 
Force Points: | 


Character Points: 5 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Comlink, datapad 


Capsule: Rel’Kan D’Trel knows she is just a figurehead 
with no real power. Still, she does not let this dismay her 
— not too often, anyway. She is dedicated to using what- 
ever little influence she has with the Colonial Governor to 
better the lot of her people. Although she privately agrees 
with the agenda of the Gor'Jen’Ar, she avoids all involve- 
ment with the resistance, fearing that if the Colonial 
Governor finds that a Gorothite politician is part of the 
underground the entire P’Dar’Ken will be eliminated. 
This, of course, would end her influence, and her oppor- 
tunity to help her people. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 45 


Chapter Five: The Gorothites =.= l A We 


ARST 


The Black Market 


The black market? No such thing on Goroth, 
my friend. Believe me. Why would I lie to an off- 
worlder such as you? 

The P’Dar’Ken and their advisors, the mem- 
bers of the Colonial Government, have de- 
clared the black market to be illegal. For any 
law-abiding B’Del such as myself, that’s rea- 
son enough not to involve myself. And, since 
all B’Dellyi are law-abiding, there can be no 
such thing as a black market. Do you under- 
stand? 

Well, if you insist, perhaps we can speak 
hypothetically. If there were a black market, it 
would have to make great efforts to escape 
notice from the Colonial Government and from 
the “Gops.” Not familiar with the term? You 
are new to our home. | speak of the Goroth 
Planetary Police; they protect us from our- 
selves, did you not know? 

And there are the informants. It’s been said 
that some would suborn B’Dellyi to act as 
informants. Against their own people, can you 
imagine? It’s just as well there’s nothing for 
them to find, of course. But I digress. 

How much easier would it be for the Gops 
to find would-be informants among off- 
worlders, hm? Too many off-worlders seem to 


Economy 


The economy is centrally managed by the 
Colonial Governor, through the P’Dar'Ken. The 
Colonial Governor is guided in all economic deci- 
sions by representatives of the major 
megacorporations. 

Most goods and services are provided by na- 
tionalized companies, their prices and tariffs set 
by the Colonial Government. There are still some 
independent sources for goods and services, but 
they are few and so small as to be irrelevant in the 
grand scheme. If they ever were to grow large 
enough to be noticed, they would be national- 
ized, too. 

Predictably, there is a strong “underground 
economy.” This is based largely on the old con- 
cepts of barter and influence, rather than on 
money (the Gorothites have come to learn that 
transactions involving credits can sometimes be 
tracked and taxed). The Colonial Governor has 
yet to figure out how to tax a barter economy. 

When it comes to hard goods, even the under- 
ground economy must buy from the nationalized 
companies initially. For example, the only manu- 
facturers of effective Gorothite-style breath masks 
are under the direct control of the Colonial Gov- 
ernor. The underground economy shelters a 
healthy trade in second-hand breath masks — 


view the B’Dellyi as “primitive lizards” ... if I 
overheard the term right. I understand that, in 
some cases, such a term might be considered 
an insult. 

Currency control is very tight for the 
B’Dellyi. The Colonial Government — at the 
request of our own P’Dar’Ken, of course — 
monitors the income and outlay of individual 
B’Del. If an individual’s expenditures were to 
exceed his registered income — which never 
happens — then that individual would have to 
be involved in the non-existent black market. 
Do you understand? 

Thus, almost all transactions — were any to 
occur — would have to be based on value for 
value. Barter. 

Take the problem you bring to me. Hypo- 
thetically speaking, lightning guns could con- 
ceivably be available from various sources. 
Not that I know any such sources. 

But, if I were to know where such items 
could be found, I would have to ask this ques- 
tion ... what service could you provide me in 
return for the goods you desire? Think of that 
offworlder, and then, perhaps, someone whom 
I would not know could help you out. 


and in jury-rigged “knock-offs," nowhere near as 
effective, yet still better than nothing — but 
anyone wanting a new model must deal with the 
Empire. 

It is very difficult for off-worlders to buy any- 
thing through the underground economy. This is 
largely because Gorothites have learned to be 
very cautious about admitting any involvement 
to non-natives. The Colonial Governor is not 
above sending snitches and spies out to investi- 
gate the black market economy. Off-worlders will 
find it easier to sell goods into the black market, 
but not too easy. Since it is a crime to buy goods 
in this manner, a Gorothite will be careful about 
buying from off-worlders he does not fully trust. 

Generally, the prices for services and new 
items, bought directly from nationalized compa- 
nies, are 10-50% higher than standard prices 
elsewhere in the Empire. Thus, a pair of 
macrobinoculars will be priced around 110-150 
credits, rather than 100 credits. There is also a 
10% tax levied on every official transaction. There- 
fore, the minimum cost for those macrobinoculars 
will be 121 credits, of which 11 credits go directly 
to the Colonial Governor’s coffers. 

Prices through the underground economy vary 
widely: basically, whatever the market will bear. 
Sellers recognize that they are risking their free- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


FF cS Chapter Five: The Gorothites 


-WA 


dom, and thus factor a kind of “hazardous-duty 
pay” into their prices. The issue is complicated 
further by the fact that much of the underground 
economy operates via barter. Off-worlders who 
donot fully understand the Gorothite perception 
of “value” will be at a severe disadvantage in any 
bargaining situation. As a guideline, the 
gamemaster should add a modifier of +5 to a 
Gorothite character's roll — whichever side of 
the issue he is on — when a Gorothite and an off- 
worlder are engaged in bargaining. Obviously, no 
taxes are levied on black-market transactions. 

The vast majority of Gorothites are “client- 
workers,” employed either directly by the 
megacorporations or by nationalized companies. 
All wages are set by the Colonial Governor and 
are chronically low. An average Gorothite will 
earn 1,000 credits a month, but perhaps 700 
credits of that will be “withheld at source” for 
taxes and “mandatory expenditures.” Some jobs 
pay slightly better — the corporations will typi- 
cally use raises and bonuses in an attempt to 
motivate some workers, not quite understanding 
that money is not a motivator for many Gorothites. 

Those natives who work on-site at the various 
Imperial facilities receive room and board in 
mass barracks and are charged an average of 250 
credits a month for the privilege. Thus, an on-site 
worker might clear 50 credits a month, while a 
“client-worker” employed by a nationalized com- 
pany in an o’beki might clear 300 credits a month. 
From this 300 credits, however, he will have to 
pay for his own room and board. 


Culture 


The Gorothite species has never engaged in 
graphic or visual arts. They have created no 
paintings, sculptures, and other physical art ob- 
jects. One could argue that a Gorothite’s wattle 


tattoos are a form of graphic art, but the natives 
themselves do not think this way. 

In contrast, the Gorothites have a passion for 
music. The majority of adult Gorothites play at 
least one musical instrument, and many are pro- 
ficient at half a dozen or more. Gorothites play for 
their own enjoyment and edification, not for the 
enjoyment of listeners (this parallels their lack of 
interest in spectator sports). 

Individuals will play by themselves, or gather 
together in informal groups ranging from quar- 
tets to large orchestra-sized groups. Traditional 
instruments run the gamut from simple percus- 
sion instruments, to wind instruments, to bowed 
or plucked stringed instruments. Some of these 
instruments are hideously complex. For example, 
the xantha — a virtuoso’s instrument if ever 
there was one — combines elements of a 24- 
string lute and a bassoon. The player simulta- 
neously plucks the strings and stops the sound- 
holes of the wind instrument while blowing into 
a goose-necked mouthpiece emerging from the 
back of the sound-box. 

Gorothite music is highly complex. There are 
more than 100 formal “forms,” each of which 
must follow many strict and complicated rules. 
Polyrhythms abound, and the whole thing is 
based on a 22-note musical scale. Off-world lis- 
teners have described Gorothite music as sound- 
ing like a large number of assorted womp-rats 
being loudly tortured inside an echo-chamber ... 
but more so, 

Written, the Gorothite language uses mean- 
ing-based ideograms — symbols that reflect the 
meaning of a word, with no direct connection to 
phonetics. Thus, reading and writing Gorothiteis 
a Very Difficult task for off-worlders. “Spoken 
Gorothite” and “written Gorothite” are two to- 
tally different specializations of the language skill. 


a RR RR RR RR 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


47 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


EE Chapter Six 


AR 
ARS™ 


The Present Situation 


The present situation represents a complex 
dynamic, an equilibrium that balances the needs 
and goals of a large number of factions ... an 
equilibrium that might not be as stable as many 
think and hope. It is attractive to describe any 
situation in terms of “good” and “evil,” of “right” 
and “wrong.” All too often, this is much too 
simplistic a way to view things, however. 

Observers wedded toa “black/white, us/them” 
dichotomy will lump the corporations together 
with the Colonial Government and the Imperial 
military presence. Similarly, they will automati- 
cally consider all parts of the Gorothite under- 
ground to be on “the same side” as the Rebel 
Alliance. Both these simplifications are mislead- 
ing, however, and policy based on such simple 
views of things will inherently be flawed. Oppor- 
tunities will be missed; unwise decisions will be 
made. 

Examine the Imperial-allied factions a little 
closer for a moment. Should the corporations, 
the Colonial Government and the Imperial mili- 
tary complex be considered “fellow travelers”? 
Probably not; in the absence of a concrete out- 
side threat, definitely not. 

The corporations are embroiled in intense 
“market warfare” among themselves. The Em- 
pire as such is sometimes useful to them, some- 
times a hindrance. Corporate representatives 
will flout Imperial regulations when they can get 
away with it, abide by them when they have to 
and use them as a competitive advantage when- 
ever the opportunity arises. 

So, too, is there a significant schism between 
the Colonial Government and the military com- 
plex, and between certain underground organi- 
zations and the Rebel Alliance. Overall the situa- 
tion is more complex than it might first appear. 
To oversimplify, and then to make decisions 
based on those simplifications, is to invite disas- 
ter for any faction. 


Imperial Involvement 


The Colonial Government 


Officially speaking, the Colonial Government 
serves an entirely “advisory” function. Accord- 
ing to the Interim Constitution put forward by the 
Empire and signed — under some duress — by 
the Rel’Kan (the Gorothite president), the native 
P’Dar’Ken is the planetary government, sover- 
eign and supreme. The Colonial Governor and 
the administrative branch “advise” the P’Dar’Ken, 
and provide support, resources, know-how and 
other services at their behest. Again officially, 
the Colonial Governor, the administrative branch 
and the corporations are all present on Goroth 
Prime at the invitation of P’Dar’Ken. The Imperial 
and corporate representatives have no rights on 
Goroth Prime; they have only privileges, freely 
granted by the P’Dar’Ken, and revocable at any 
time. 

Reality is quite different, of course. The Colo- 
nial Governor and the bureaucracy make up the 
only government that matters. The Rel’Kan and 
the P’Dar’Ken’Al (“Councilmembers”) go along 
with the fiction that they are allowing the Imperi- 
als to stay purely because if they did not they 
would be replaced by natives who did go along 
with the lie. 

There are two “factions” within the Colonial 
Government that might be described as the “ex- 
ecutive” and the “administrative” branches. 


The Executive Branch 


The executive branch comprises the Colonial 
Governor himself — at the moment, one Marsh 
Limoth — and his personal staff. It is the execu- 
tive branch that makes policy, and mediates 
between the corporations, the military and the 
Imperial government on Coruscant. 

The present Colonial Governor is relatively 
new to Goroth. Marsh Limoth — the “Right Hon- 
orable Marsh Limoth,” to use his proper title — 
is a member of one of the traditional “Great 
Houses” of the Old Republic, the son of Senator 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


E Oe Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


-WA 


Garlan Limoth, one of the original supporters of 
Palpatine. Senator Garlan Limoth withdrew his 
support soon after Palpatine declared himself 
Emperor, it may be remembered ... and almost 
immediately thereafter died in a tragic accident. 
Marsh Limoth, however, never repudiated his 
personal support of Palpatine, turning against 
his own father when Garlan began making “un- 
wise” statements soon before his tragic death. 

As a reward for his loyalty, Marsh Limoth was 
assigned as a “Personal Assistant” to the Moff of 
the Trans-Nebular Sector, Nebin Cray — much to 
the frustration of Cray, who had no desire for a 
“Personal Assistant,” much less one appointed 
directly by the Emperor. Still, Cray knew which 
side his havla was buttered on, and made no 
complaints. When the original Colonial Governor 
assigned to Goroth expressed a desire to resign, 
it was Cray who proposed that his own Personal 
Assistant might be the perfect person to take 
over that duty. Cray's “sacrifice” in giving up 
such an efficient assistant for the greater good of 
the Empire has raised the governor’s stock with 
some factions of the Imeprial bureaucracy! 

Marsh Limoth’s loyalty is, and always has 
been, to Emperor Palpatine. (If Goroth is used in 
a campaign that takes place after the Battle of 
Yavin, his loyalty is to the Empire as a whole.) He 
is a “true Imperial,” and takes much pride in the 
fact. 


pennant 


Despite scurrilous claims to the contrary, he 
is not “feathering his own nest” on Goroth. He is 
doing what he truly thinks is best, fostering the 
“greatest good for the greatest number” within 
the Empire. He serves because he believes in 
what he is doing, not for personal aggrandize- 
ment and profit. It helps, of course, that he has 
inherited quite a large fortune and so will never 
have to worry about money. 

He scorns the bureaucrats of the administra- 
tive branch. They are opportunists, plain and 
simple, he believes. They have no honor, no 
belief in the Empire, and are doing their jobs 
merely to enhance their own prospects. It galls 
Limoth no end that the administrative branch is 
not fully under his control. Although he was 
appointed directly by the Emperor himself — 
albeit through various levels of intermediaries — 
he does not have hiring and firing control over 
the administrative personnel. They were given 
their jobs by the distant Imperial bureaucracy, 
which cares little for the troubles of a “petty 
Imperial governor on an insignificant subject 
world.” 


w Colonial Governor Marsh Limoth 
Type: Hard-nosed Imperial Loyalist 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy 4D, bureaucracy: Goroth executive branch 
5D, business 4D, value 3D, willpower 5D 


EE Colonial Governor Marsh Limoth {right}, Crela Nen (left) and A'Lenba Prefect Del Obarren (middle). 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Mike Vilardi 


MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 4D, command 4D+2, persuasion 3D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Character Points: 4 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), datapad, comlink 
Capsule: Although he is in his early 50s, Marsh 
Limoth looks like a man 20 years younger. He is 
handsome, ina hard kind of way, with chestnut hair 
and eyes so dark they seem to be unrelieved black. 
He rarely speaks, preferring to listen — but when he 
does speak, it is always to say something that cuts 
to the heart of any issue. He is a “true believer” in 
the Empire, and in the Emperor himself; loyalty is 
the keystone of his being. He is entirely pragmatic 
about his actions on Goroth Prime — not “evil” in 
the slightest; he feels empathy for the “client-work- 
ers” (sometimes, at least), but cannot let his emo- 
tions get in the way of what will benefit the trillions 
of sentient beings that are part of the Empire. 

He loves his young wife, Hola Limoth, and his 
two children. It is impossible to continue to classify 
Marsh as “evil” after one has seen the pure and 
simple joy he feels playing with his children. 


The Administrative Branch 


The much larger administrative branch is re- 
sponsible for executing that policy — for making 
the wheels of government run smoothly. Cur- 
rently, the Director of Administration—the most 
powerful member of this faction — is one Crela 
Nen. There are currently more than 2,000 bureau- 
crats, middle-managers, time-and-motion experts, 
support personnel and “data-pushers” on the 
payroll of the administrative branch, in contrast 
to a total of 95 members of the executive branch. 
When the Colonial Government was established 
in Graith, there were fewer than 1,000 adminis- 
trators; under the leadership — and incessant 
lobbying — of Crela Nen, this number has more 
than doubled in 10 years, and is still increasing. 

It is the administrative branch that actually 
gets things done on Goroth Prime. Without its 
support, Marsh Limoth would be as much a 
figurehead as Rel’Kan D’Trel B’Rar Jok, president 
of the P’Dar’Ken, with as little real power. 

Members of the administrative branch are 
typically “career bureaucrats.” Few of them feel 
any real loyalty to the Emperor. If Palpatine were 
to fall and be replaced by someone else, their 
jobs would be laregely unchanged: no matter 
whether the political structure is called “Empire” 
or “Republic” (or “Theocracy” or “Common- 
wealth” or whatever), somebody would have to 
continue to do what they have been doing. 

Since his arrival on Goroth, Marsh Limoth has 
been trying to “bring the bureaucracy to heel” — 
to extend his personal power and influence far 
enough to actually affect what the administrative 
branch is doing. Predictably, the administrators 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation Pa E T 


ARST 


— led by Crela Nen — have been fighting this 
(with considerable success). The last time Limoth 
tried to enforce his will on the bureaucracy (by 
eliminating paid overtime, of all things!) things 
just “coincidentally” started to fall apart. His 
personal computer system crashed, and none of 
the Management Information System experts — 
all part of the administrative branch, of course— 
could find anything wrong. Memos sent from the 
Colonial Governor’s office never arrived at their 
destination or arrived in the electronic in-boxes 
of the wrong people. Even the climate control in 
Limoth’s personal quarters started having prob- 
lems; one night, the temperature dropped so low 
that frost formed on the furniture. It was merely 
coincidental, of course, that, within hours of 
Limoth’s rescinding his restriction on paid over- 
time, all these problems “spontaneously” cleared 


up. 


m Director of Administration Crela Nen 

Type: Self-serving Imperial Bureaucrat 

DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy 6D, bureaucracy: Imperial administration 
7D+2, business 5D, streetwise 4D+2, willpower 6D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 4D, command 4D, command: Imperial bureau- 
crats 5D, con 3D+2, investigation 3D+2, persuasion 3D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Character Points: 1 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Datapad, comlink 
Capsule: Crela Nen has been part of the Imperial 
bureaucracy most of her long life. She is petite of 
figure, with a nose like a hatchet, and green eyes 
that seem to glint like polished permasteel. Sheis in 
her 50s but has the ambition, energy and drive of a 
person in her early 20s. Crela Nen’s only loyalty is 
to Crela Nen. She will do whatever it takes to further 
her (considerable) ambition. She is far from stupid, 
however. Sometimes it is necessary to compromise 
and to knuckle under to superior force, and Nen can 
infallibly recognize those time. When the opportu- 
nity presents itself, however, she is tenacity and 
political savvy incarnate. 


Military Presence 


In Orbit 

Even before the Era of Rebellion, Goroth was 
classed as a “strategic system,” and thus to be 
protected. Now that the Rebel Alliance has won 
some significant gains, the Empire has increased 
the force defending Goroth. 

There are always two Imperial Star Destroyers 
in high orbit around the planet. One — the flag- 
ship, the Valor — is in an equatorial orbit; the 
other is ina polar orbit with a higher perigee. The 
Valor is always on-station; Goroth is its assigned 
patrol area, and only a major emergency else- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


ST eee Chapter Six: The Present Situation 
Se ee ee 


-WA 


where in the sector would be enough to draw it 
away. The second “slot” in the task force is filled 
by various ships; every two months, a new ship 
is rotated in to serve a tour. 

The Valor has less than its normal comple- 
ment of TIE fighters in its hanger bays, merely 
because 40 of the small vessels are deployed on 
the planet below: 24 at Graith, eight at A’Lenba, 
and eight more scattered around at other o’bekis. 
This leaves the Valor with 32 TIEs in its hangers, 
including 12 interceptors and 12 TIE bombers. 

The second ship in the task force has its entire 
complement of 72 TIE fighters — again including 
12 interceptors and 12 TIE bombers — ready for 
any space action that might be required. 

The Valor is commanded by Admiral Val 
DeGoort. 


wm Admiral Val DeGoort 
Type: Imperial Admiral 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Blaster 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+1 
Bureaucracy 3D+2, bureaucracy: Imperial navy 4D+2, plan- 
etary systems 4D, tactics: fleets 5D, willpower 4D 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
Astrogation 5D, capital ship gunnery 3D+2, capital ship 
piloting 3D+2, capital ship piloting: Imperial Star Destroyer 
5D, communications 3D+2, sensors 3D+2, starship gun- 
nery 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D+2 
Command 5D 


STRENGTH 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 3D+2 

Computer programming/repair 4D, starship weapon re- 
pair 4D 

Force Points: 2 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 11 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), comlink, datapad 


Capsule: During his 25 years in the Navy, Admiral 
Val DeGoort has proven his competence and his 
leadership qualities countless times. Heis respected 
— almost adored — by his crew. Unfortunately, it 
does not take much to ruin — or at least blight — a 
Naval career. DeGoort made one mistake — just 
one— and it can be argued that the mistake was not 
even really his. Regardless, the Navy's bureaucracy 
holds him personally responsible for an incident 
where DeGoort's Valor collided with another Impe- 
rial Star Destroyer during a close-approach coordi- 
nated-action exercise. This single demerit in his 
docket was enough to see DeGoort shuffled off to a 
low-priority, “penal” assignment: the defense of 
Goroth. 

DeGoort believes that through perfect execu- 
tion of his present duties he can expunge this 
demerit from his record. Thus, he has become a 
stickler for Imperial regulations. He will follow ev- 
ery order he is given to the absolute letter. Person- 
ally, he rather likes and even respects Colonial 
Governor Marsh Limoth — almost as much as he 
despises Crela Nen. However, that affection does 
not extend to respect for Limoth’s performance. He 
does not believe that aSenator’s son— particularly 


Mike Vilardi 


Admiral Val De Goort (right) and General Anderton Kloff. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 51 


a disgraced Senator's son — should be in charge of 
a strategic system like Goroth. That post should be 
held by an Imperial Navy officer. 


Planetside 


On Goroth, the Imperial military presence is 
under the command of General Anderton Kloff, a 
hard-nosed but well-respected Imperial Army 
officer. All military personnel are under his chain 
of command. Those TIE fighters rotated to ground- 
based station are also under General Kloff’s com- 
mand — so says the dispatch from Marshall 
VeNiste, Army Sector Commander for the Trans- 
Nebular Sector. The fighter pilots chafe under 
this, of course: what do “mudworms” know about 
fighter tactics, and who is Kloff to give them 
orders? Still, Admiral DeGoort has instructed 
them that they must obey Kloff’s orders. 

There is strong inter-service rivalry between 
the pilots and the Imperial Army troopers. This 
rivalry is more or less friendly, though; pilots and 
troopers often relax together, a time for exchang- 
ing vastly exaggerated war stories. 

In contrast, the rivalry between the pilots and 
the Goroth Planetary Police approaches down- 
right hatred. Each force views the other as pam- 
pered prima donnas with no understanding of 
what real warfare entails. Goroth Planetary Po- 
lice and pilots stay well out of each other's way; 
when they do not, arguments invariably erupt. 
On at least one occasion, a confrontation degen- 
erated into a brawl. (The pilots explain the seri- 
ous drubbing they received as just a matter of 
being outnumbered!) 

Thereis rivalry too between the Imperial Army 
troopers and the Goroth Planetary Police, but 
this is more respectful, and has never degener- 
ated into violence. 


m General Anderton Kloff 
Type: Arrogant Army Officer 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Blaster 4D+2, blaster artillery 4D+2, brawling parry 4D, 
vehicle blasters 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Intimidation 3D+2, survival 3D+2, tactics: ground assault 
7D, willpower 4D 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Communications 4D, walker operation 5D 
PERCEPTION 3D+1 
Command 5D, command: Imperial Army troops 7D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 4D 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Demolition 4D, walker repair 4D 
Force Points: 1 
Character Points: 10 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), reinforced blast helmet 
(+1D physical, +1 energy to head), comlink, datapad 


Capsule: General Kloff is a “lifer” in the Imperial 
Army. He initially commanded an AT-AT, but quickly 
climbed the ranks. Unlike many senior officers, he 
has not forgotten what it is like being a “line sol- 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation =. FA ft 


, UU0XDU_UDUU=QUUIzI R= Sa 


dier,” out there in harm's way. He is an unyielding 
disciplinarian, but he is also scrupulously fair. His 
men personally dislike him, considering him an 
emotionless automaton, but professionally they 
have the highest respect for him and would follow 
him to the ends of the universe if he ordered them 
to do so. 

Kloff, predictably, considers the Navy to be a 
bunch of effete “vacheads” who have no under- 
standing of warfare, (“The Navy takes the glory, the 
Army takes the real estate,” is one of his favorite 
aphorisms.) Hehas read Admiral DeGoort's docket, 
and has written the officer off as a general screw-up. 
Kloff is lobbying the High Command to have the 
entire military operation in the Goroth system put 
under his command: not just the ground forces, but 
the orbiting Star Destroyers as well. Taking this to 
its logical conclusion, he is also applying pressure 
— subtly and very carefully — to have himself 
elevated to the position of Colonial Governor in- 
stead of “that data-pusher, Marsh Limoth.” 


Laws 


Officially, the entire body of law on Goroth 
Prime is promulgated by the P’Dar’Ken. As the 
sovereign ruling body, the P’Dar’Ken is the only 
organization on the planet with the right to enact 
or enforce laws. It is thus purely a “coincidence”. 
that the laws on Goroth exactly match the details 
of Imperial martial law ... 

The P’Dar’Ken has “requested” the Colonial 
Governor to enforce the laws it has promulgated: 
to handle investigation, enforcement and all as- 
pects of the justice system. The Colonial Gover- 
nor has “reluctantly” acquiesced to this invita- 
tion. 

Society on Goroth is tightly-regulated. Cynical 
off-worlders have said that anything not prohib- 
ited is obligatory; things are not quite that bad, 
but they are close. The laws of Goroth break 
down into five main categories. 


Curfew 


It is strictly illegal for native Gorothites to be 
abroad on the surface after sunset, except for 
“client-workers” who are on shift and under the 
supervision of security personnel. Strictly speak- 
ing, Gorothites are not even allowed to travel 
freely through their underground “neighbor- 
hoods” between sunset and sunrise; they are 
supposed to remain within their personal resi- 
dences. This law is not strongly enforced in the 
Gorothite o’bekis and Imperial patrols are rare in 
the subterranean residences. 

Officially speaking, this curfew extends to all 
non-military personnel. The Colonial Governor 
has waived this for non-native employees of rights- 
holding corporations, but this waiver is a privi- 
lege, not a right, and can be revoked without 
notice and without appeal. Off-world visitors are 
also officially covered by the curfew. Enforce- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


— TAR Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


-WA 


ment is spotty and arbitrary, however. Some off- 
worlders are free to wander around after dark; 
others — those that the Colonial Government 
suspects of having “anti-Imperial leanings” — are 
hassled unmercifully if they are abroad during 
the hours of curfew. 


Public Meetings 


All “public meetings” of native Gorothites — 
officially defined as “more than 12 individuals” — 
are strictly illegal. This law has been waived 
solely for J'Nes B’Sar (“Truth Gatherings”). Within 
the subterranean neighborhoods and the cliff 
dwellings, this law is not universally enforced, 
again simply because patrols are irregular. En- 
forcement is arbitrary on this score as well. 


Weapons 


It is strictly illegal for native Gorothites to own 
any weapon — any weapon at all. This law is 
strictly enforced when it comes to ranged weap- 
ons: blasters especially, but slug-throwers as 
well (particularly armor-piercing guns like the 
“Hammer” medium slug-thrower, described 
later). Any Gorothite found in possession of a 
ranged weapon will be instantly arrested and 
thrown in jail for a long, long time. If the armed 
Gorothite is in a “sensitive” area, security per- 
sonnel are well within their authority to sum- 
marily execute the “dangerous criminal.” Sum- 
mary executions are rare — they tend to rile up 
the natives, after all — but they do occur from 
time to time. 

Strictly speaking, this prohibition extends to 
melee weapons as well, even to knives. Enforce- 
ment is more lax here, and very arbitrary; after 
all, a knife is a tool, with more potential uses than 
gutting an Imperial representative. Some 
Gorothites — particularly those in the various 
underground movements — have recently taken 
to carrying “walking staves” with them. These 
are “survival tools” (so the Gorothites claim). 
Typically they are staffs made of light metal 
alloys, about 1.5 meters long, with a broad hook 
onthe top anda sharp point on the bottom. They 
claim that they carry these for “safety” when 
walking on the rugged surface of the planet. After 
all, staffs can be used for balance; the hook can be 
used to give aid to a fellow who has fallen down 
a crevice or cliff; and the point has a myriad of 
uses, such as for additional traction on steep 
hills. Of course, a “walking stave” can also be 
used as a weapon (STR+1D damage, Easy diffi- 
culty) ... but a law-abiding Gorothite would never 
think of doing so! 

Corporate security personnel who have been 
“bonded” — in other words, run through a back- 
ground check by the Colonial Government — are 
allowed to carry personal weapons up to and 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


including blaster rifles and grenades. Other cor- 
porate personnel are limited to “sidearms” — 
nothing larger than a standard blaster pistol; 
heavy blaster pistols and blaster rifles are pro- 
hibited. 

Non-corporate off-worlders are officially pro- 
hibited from bringing any ranged weapons on- 
planet with them. Enforcement of this restriction 
is quite arbitrary, however. Many Imperial per- 
sonnel will turn a blind eye to a sporting blaster 
carried for “personal defense” unless the civilian 
involved is suspected of “anti-Imperial leanings.” 

Predictably, there are no restrictions whatso- 
ever on military personnel, on-duty or off. 


Armor 


Native Gorothites are forbidden to own or 
wear armor of any kind, even a blast helmet. 
Possession of armor is considered prima facie 
evidence of terrorist activities, warranting along 
jail term or even summary execution, depending 
on the circumstances. 

Bonded corporate security personnel can wear 
any form of unpowered armor. Other corporate 
personnel are officially forbidden to wear armor 
— although possession is not illegal — but again 
this is rarely enforced. Off-worlders not associ- 
ated with a rights-holding corporation, too, fall 
under the same law. Again, most Imperial person- 
nel will turn a blind eye to a light blast vest for 
“personal security.” Possession of any powered 
armor is a serious offense. 


Treason 


The largest category of laws deals with “trea- 
sonous activities.” The way Imperial martial law 
is set up, “treason” is defined entirely by the 
ranking officer involved — on Goroth, Colonial 
Governor Limoth himself. He is free to define 
whatever he sees fit as “treasonous,” and can 
change that definition arbitrarily, without warn- 
ing. There is no process of appeal; if the Colonial 
Governor says you have committed treason, that 
is all there is to the matter. 

Certain activities are always classed as trea- 
sonous: attempting to harm Imperial or corpo- 
rate personnel, attempting to damage Imperial 
or corporate assets (the size or value is irrel- 
evant, whether it’s a datapad or a hyperbaride 
cracking plant), and attempting to enter a re- 
stricted area. 

Theft, depending on what is stolen, might be 
classed as treason, as might speaking out against 
the Colonial Government, the Empire, or even 
the rights-holding corporations. At the Colonial 
Governor's whim, any oftheinfractions described 
above might be classed as treason, depending on 
the circumstances. Thus, a native Gorothite on 
the surface after dark might be charged with 


breaking curfew, or with treason, depending on 
how the Colonial Governor wants to handle it. 

The punishment for treasonous activities is 
almost always termination — with or without 
due process. 


The Justice System 


The administration of justice is handled by 
both the Imperial Army and the Colonial Govern- 
ment. Officially, the Colonial Governor has juris- 
diction and authority over all facets of security 
on Goroth. General Kloff, however, is loath to 
leave all security and justice issues in the hands 
of a civilian — particularly a civilian like Marsh 
Limoth. Kloff has argued — with some success — 
that issues of “military security,” as opposed to 
“civil security,” are under his jurisdiction. Limoth 
has had to accept that ... but there are frequent 
wrangles over just where military security ends 
and civil security begins. 

Both the Colonial Government and the army 
run jails (the army calls them “stockades”). The 
civilian jails are within the Colonial Government 
pressure complexes at each enclave; the military 
stockades — considerably smaller — are within 
the Imperial Army barracks at each o'beki. 

“Due process,” when it comes to justice, is 
whatever the individual with jurisdiction (either 
Limoth or Kloff) says it is. There is no presump- 
tion of innocence, and no appeals process. Des- 
ignates of Limoth and Kloff can—and do — make 
decisions on the spot, incarcerating people who 
break the laws, or even executing them. Some- 
times, both individuals will perform “show tri- 
als,” which are broadcast over the planetary 
vidnet — often to demonstrate that there is 
actually a justice system at work, but sometimes 
to “send a message” to the populace. The verdict 
is always whatever the individual with jurisdic- 
tion wants it to be. 


The Corporations 


Market Warfare 


Thecorporations who hold exploitation rights 
are in competition with each other, plain and 
simple. They are constantly squabbling with each 
other for position, and for even the slightest 
market benefit. Alliances and rivalries constantly 
spring up between different corps, shift like 
weathervanes in variable wind, and dissolve ona 
moment’s notice. Most of the rivalries and 
squabbles are more or less above-board; there 
are many ways — proxy fights, propaganda, eco- 
nomic warfare, and so forth — for corporations 
to compete without breaking any laws (moral 
and ethical guidelines are another thing alto- 
gether, of course!). 

This does not mean that the corporations will 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation =.= 8 FA fc 
WARS” 


not stoop to dirty tricks, industrial espionage, 
suborning of competitors’ assets and even lim- 
ited sabotage if there is something to be gained 
and if they think they can get away with it. 

Generally, the corporations approach their 
relationship with the Empire in terms of “hang 
together or hang separately.” Corporations will 
generally side with other corporations in any 
disagreement with the Colonial Governor or the 
military ... unless there is an advantage to be had 
by doing otherwise, of course. 


TaggeCo 


TaggeCo has the largest and most influential 
presence on Goroth Prime, and tends to compete 
based on sheer weight of assets and resources. 
TaggeCo’s local manager — Dimone Irrv—tends 
to handle problems by whistling up more person- 
nel and other assets from regional division head- 
quarters. The fact that she almost always gets 
what she asks for indicates that her corporation 
holds her in high esteem. 


m Dimone Irrv, Executive Vice-President, 


Operations 

Type: Business Executive 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Dodge 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Bureaucracy 5D, bureaucracy: TaggeCo 7D, business 5D, 
business: TaggeCo 7D, languages 4D+2, streetwise 5D, 
willpower 5D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 5D, command 4D, investigation 4D, persuasion 5D 
STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D+2 

Character Points: 3 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, datapad 
Capsule: Dimone Irrv has reached her current posi- 
tion through sheer managerial competence, not 
through the backstabbing that so often accompa- 
nies a rise in the corporate ranks. She is not naive 
about corporate politics, however; she simply does 
not choose to use underhanded tactics if more 
traditional methods will serve. Various rivals have 
found out, to their detriment, that if forced into it, 
Irrv is an absolute expert at corporate maneuver- 
ing, however. 

She is in her late 30s — young for such a respon- 
sible position — and is quite attractive in a hard 
kind of way, with silver-blond hair and hazel eyes 
that seem to miss nothing. 


Karflo Corporation 


On Goroth Prime, Karflo Corporation may be 
“number two,” but it is certainly trying harder. 
For various reasons, the senior executives of 
Karflo are unwilling — or perhaps unable — to 
divert as many assets to Goroth as TaggeCo. Still, 
under the auspices of the Managing Director, 
Leito Retinol, Karflo-Goroth is doing very well for 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—ST 
-WA 


ono 


-=r Dimone tiv kecon, for rine Leito Retinol! (right), Cambion Bayrd (second from left) and Boto del ibn Garl (left). 


Ie 


Rear ee ai: 


itself. Because Retinol cannot whistle up addi- 
tional resources at whim, like his counterpart at 
TaggeCo, the Managing Director has learned to 
cope with setbacks and challenges on his own. 
He has learned well: Karflo’s productivity per 
employeeis several times better than TaggeCo's. 
Retinol is currently negotiating a “strategic alli- 
ance” with Cambion Bayrd, Director of Opera- 
tions at Trigdale Metallurgy, to pool their re- 
sources in an attempt to oust TaggeCo from the 
number one spot. Both Retinol and Bayrd think 
Dimone Irrv is ignorant of their maneuvering; in 
reality, however, she knows exactly what stage 
the negotiations have reached, and how they will 
probably turn out. 


w Leito Retinol, Managing Director 
Type: Business Executive 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Dodge 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy 5D+2, bureaucracy: Karflo 7D+2, business 
5D+1, business: Karflo 6D+2, plant operation 8D, scholar: 
hyperbaride theory 10D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 4D, command 5D, persuasion 5D 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Character Points: 1 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, datapad 


Capsule: Little is known about Leito Retinol's back- 
ground. His resume is considered a classified docu- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


ment by the corporation ... which, of course, has 
spurred considerable activity in the rumor-mill 
about him. It is known (through unofficial sources) 
that he once worked for acompany called Dynamic 
Synergetics Inc., although nobody has been able to 
find out anything about that company. It is undeni- 
able, however, that Leito Retinol understands the 
hyperbaride extraction and cracking process bet- 
ter than most engineers! 

Retinol is in his mid-40s, a tall, slender, aristo- 
cratic-looking man with short gray hair and a nose 
like a hawk's beak. He likes to dress in black. His 
office in the pressure complex is filled with memen- 
tos from across the galaxy, including (mounted on 
the wall behind his desk) a short spear, tipped with 
a primitive stone point. He is a good manager; if his 
superiors had to find one thing to criticize about 
him, they would probably say that sometimes he is 
just a little too clever for his own good. 


Trigdale Metallurgy 


As a secondary rights-holder, Trigdale is defi- 
nitely a “second-class corporate citizen” on 
Goroth. During the bidding for rights, the com- 
pany did not have the resources to acquire pri- 
mary rights, and now it does not have the re- 
sources to support adequately the rights it did 
acquire. So believes the Director of Operations, 
at least. Director Cambion Bayrd is frustrated. He 
has full profit-and-loss responsibility for the 
Goroth operation. If it succeeds, he’s a hero; if it 
fails, he’s a pariah. 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


Unfortunately, he is not receiving the support 
from headquarters that he needs to make the 
operation a success. This is why he is breaking 
very strict Trigdale guidelines in negotiating a 
strategic partnership with Karflo. Even though a 
major infraction like this would normally be a 
firing offense, Bayrd is not really worried. He has 
no intention of sticking with the agreement he 
negotiates, at least not in the long term. He 
expects a short-term benefit ... and then he will 
unilaterally dissolve the joint-venture. Certainly, 
his actions would still be considered in violation 
of corporate guidelines, but if he is called on the 
carpet he will just point to the real gains Trigdale 
will undoubtably have made from his maneuver- 
ing. After all, he reasons, it is always easier to get 
forgiveness than permission! 


m Cambion Bayrd, Director of 
Operations 
Type: Corporate Executive 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy 4D, bureaucracy: Trigdale 5D, business 5D, 
business: Trigdale 7D, streetwise 4D, willpower 6D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 5D, con 5D, persuasion 6D 


Character Points: 5 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, datapad 
Capsule: Cambion Bayrd’s nickname, both inside 
and outside Trigdale, is “Goodtime Cambie.” His 
broad, florid face is always split in a beaming smile, 
and he always seems to find humor in everything. 
He works hard, everyone admits, but he plays even 
harder. It is all too easy to categorize Bayrd as 
something of a buffoon who owes his elevated 
position to connections, not to personal skill. 
Writing him off as such would be a severe mis- 
take. Bayrd’s outgoing, sometimes-buffoonish, de- 
meanor conceals a mind as sharp as a laser-scalpel 
and a will as hard as durasteel, He is a master at 
backstabbing, character assassination, and, should 
the need arise, could easily manage an executive 
coup. Bayrd is in his early 50s, a rotund character 
with thinning ginger-red hair. His slitty eyes are 
bright green. 


Vaufthau Processing Industries 

Definitely “low man on thespirit-symbol pole,” 
Vaufthau seems to be totally outclassed by the 
other primary and secondary rights-holders. 
Some people wonder what the corporation is 
doing on Goroth at all. After all, Vaufthau’s expe- 
rience is in secondary and tertiary manufactur- 
ing, and in urban construction. Never before has 
it shown any corporate interest in primary re- 
source extraction and processing. 

Vaufthau’s presence on Goroth is entirely due 
to the local administrator, one of the few 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation qunennn i A ees 


ARS 


Sullustans to have earned a position of authority 
in the company. He successfully lobbied his su- 
periors to give him the resources necessary to 
acquire secondary exploitation rights, and to 
follow up on them. Currently, under Boto del ibn 
Garl’s leadership, the Vaufthau operation is en- 
gaged in extensive industrial espionage, target- 
ing virtually all the other corporations on Goroth. 


m Boto del ibn Garl, Local Administrator 

Type: Sullustan Corporate Executive 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Dodge 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Bureaucracy 4D, bureaucracy: Vaufthau 5D, business 5D, 

business: Vaufthau 7D, languages 3D+2, streetwise 4D, 

value 4D, willpower 4D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 5D, con 5D, investigation 5D, persuasion 5D 

STRENGTH 1D+1 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Computer programming/repair 4D+2 

Special Abilities: 

Enhanced Sense: +2D to search and Perception in low-light 

conditions. 

Location Sense: +1D to astrogation when jumping to a 

location the Sullustan has visited before. A Sullustan can 

always remember how to get back to someplace he has 

visited. 

Character Points: 13 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, datapad 

Capsule: It was far from easy for ibn Garl to claw his 

way up the “corporate ladder.” He has had to 

sacrifice a lot to make it ... including his morals and 

his ethics. Those few colleagues who know what he 

is truly capable of believe he will climb even higher. 
Ibn Garl is secretive in the extreme, never letting 

his left hand know what his right is doing — or, 

some cynics would say, that he even had a right 

hand. His attitude could best be encapsulated by 

the phrase, “All's fair in love and war ... and busi- 

ness is the highest form of war.” 


The Slave Trade 


The Colonial Government is the body that 
handles the “client-workers,” under the author- 
ity of the Empire. Officially, the “client-workers” 
are direct employees of the Colonial Govern- 
ment, which in turn brokers their services to the 
various corporate and pan-corporate facilities 
that use them. The corporations pay the Colonial 
Government for the services of the client-work- 
ers, who then pay the workers themselves. Some- 
what predictably, the rates that the corporations 
pay to the Colonial Government are highly clas- 
sified. Presumably, however, the Colonial Gov- 
ernment is pocketing some profit from the deal. 

While the client-workers are considered di- 
rect employees of the Colonial Government, it is 
the corporations who are responsible for their 
safety and for security issues involving them. If a 
corporation forces its client-workers to operate 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


=S AR Chapter Six: The Present Situation 
ee 


"WA 


in unsafe conditions — “unsafe,” in this context, 
presumably meaning “in danger of imminent 
death” — the Colonial Government may levy 
fines and punitive damages. These payments are 
to reimburse the Colonial Government for the 
potential loss of revenue-generating employees. 
So, too, are the corporations responsible for 
keeping the client-workers “in line.” Corpora- 
tions can be held responsible by the Colonial 
Government for any damage or disruption caused 
by client-workers on contract to them. Thus, it is 
in the corporations’ best interest to keep the 
client-workers under tight control, and at least 
somewhat safe. 

Although most client-workers on Goroth are 
Gorothites, recurring rumors claim that mem- 
bers of other species can be found in the client- 
worker ranks. If there are off-worlders among the 
client-workers, presumably they, too, are in the 
direct employ of the Colonial Government, and 
contracted out to the corporations. 


The Underground 


There is no single, monolithic “resistance 
movement” on Goroth Prime. Instead, there are 
several distinct organizations. Most share simi- 
lar goals, but they disagree on just how to turn 
those goals into reality. Three of the most impor- 
tant “underground” organizations are discussed 
below. 

Predictably, the Colonial Government is very 
interested in stamping out the existing under- 
ground organizations. Membership in a resis- 
tance “terrorist” group is definitely considered 
high treason, and is punishable by death. 


Gor'Jen'Ar (“Committee for Free 
Goroth”) 


The Gor’Jen’Ar is undeniably the most conser- 
vative — its members would probably say “ratio- 
nal” — of all the resistance groups. It is also the 
largest and the most respectable throughout 
Gorothite society. Interestingly enough, the Co- 
lonial Government considers Gor’Jen’Arthe most 
significant danger to the Imperial occupation. 


Goals 

The central goal of the Gor’Jen’Ar is the re- 
moval of the client-worker system, and the estab- 
lishment of the P’Dar’Ken and the Rel’Kan as the 
real planetary government of Goroth. Unlike some 
other resistance groups, the Gor'Jen’Ar does not 
necessarily countenance the expulsion of the 
Empire from the planet. After all, the Empire 
represents a source of valuable resources, tech- 
nology and knowledge that can accelerate the 
rebuilding of Gorothite society. It is only the 
relationship between the Gorothite people and 
the Empire that must change. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


History and Organization 


The Gor’Jen’Ar was the first organized resis- 
tance outfit to emerge after the arrival of the 
Empire. It is organized into cells of three. Each 
member knows the two other members of her 
cell, the three members in the cell directly below 
her (but not the members of the cells below her 
cell-mates). She also has a way to contact — but 
does not know the identity of —a member in the 
cell one layer up the “tree” from her. 

The leader of the Gor’Jen’Ar is someone known 
as S’Ten Gali Ak’Ar. Only the six or so most senior 
members of the Gor’Jen’Ar have ever met Ak’Ar 
face to face. The rest of the members do not even 
know whether their ultimate leader’s name is 
real, or anomme de guerre. 

Only Ak’Ar — and perhaps not even her — 
knows exactly how many members the Gor’Jen’Ar 
has. Estimates range from several hundred to 
well over 2,000. 


Recent Activity and Future Plans 


Under the leadership of S'Ten Gali Ak’Ar, the 
Gor’Jen’Ar is trying to walk a very narrow and 
precipitous edge. Unlike some of the other resis- 
tance groups, the Gor’Jen’Ar recognizes and ac- 
knowledges that insurrection represents a very 
great risk: not only to the insurrectionists them- 
selves, but to Gorothite society as a whole. Push 
the Empire too far, and the response might be 
genocidal ... 

Still, the Gor’Jen’Ar is taking action, but cau- 
tiously. Rather than blowing things up, Gor’Jen’Ar 
members are trying to educate the rest of the 
known galaxy about the truth of events on Goroth. 
They are suborning visitors, smugglers and en- 
trepreneurs to take “manifestos” with them when 
they leave and publicize them when they visit 
other worlds. Eventually, the Gor’Jen’Ar mem- 
bers hope, public pressure and condemnation 
will force the Empire into relenting. So far, little 
has happened, however. The Gor’Jen’Ar is start- 
ing to escalate its program, but again very care- 
fully. Members are now trying to suborn employ- 
ees — preferably middle managers — of the 
rights-holding corporations, swaying them to the 
Gorothites’ side. If enough corporate executives 
and managers are “converted,” maybe the “pres- 
sure from within” will force a change. 

The Gor’Jen’Ar is also behind some “acci- 
dents” which have destroyed or damaged impor- 
tant corporate resources (and killed one “clumsy” 
corporate security investigator). On principle, 
the Gor’Jen’Ar has no qualms about killing or 
destroying “for the cause.” The only thing that 
worries them is the potential for overwhelming 
and brutal response. 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation s fA feces 
ARS 


STen Gali Ak’Ar 


Type: Gorothite Philosopher/Warrior 

DEXTERITY 3D+2 

Brawling parry 4D+1, dodge 5D, firearms 4D, melee combat 4D, melee 
combat: walking stave 5D, melee parry 4D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 

Alien species 4D+2, cultures: Gorothite 6D, streetwise 4D, streetwise: 
Graith 7D, survival 5D, survival: Goroth badlands 6D+2, tactics: squads 8D 
MECHANICAL 3D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 4D+1, cesa 6D+2, command 4D, command: Gor'Jen'Ar members 6D, 
hide 5D, investigation 4D, persuasion 6D+2, search 5D+2, sneak 4D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Special Abilities: 

Hyperbaride Immunity: Gorothites are less affected by the contaminants in 
the air, water and food of their world. 

Smell: +1D to search skill when tracking by scent. 

Force Points: 2 


Character Points: 3 

Move: 12 

Equipment: “Hammer” slug-thrower (3D+1), walking stave (STR+1D), 
comlink, breath mask 


Capsule: S'Ten Gali Ak’Ar (her real name) is an example of the 
strange contradictions that hardship can create. By nature and 
choice, she is a philosopher and a student of the universe; by 
necessity, she is a warrior and a kind of “politician-in-exile.” Sheis a 
true leader. If circumstances were different, she would prefer to lead 
her loyal followers from the front line, taking on herself every risk. 
She recognizes, though, that her real value is in her tactical and 
psychological expertise, although it pains her, particularly when her 
group suffers casualties. 

She lives in the subterranean neighborhoods of Graith, under several 
false identities. The Imperials have tried to track her down on several 
occasions, but other Gorothites—even thosenot members ofGor'Jen'Ar 
— willingly mislead the troopers and cover S’Ten’s tracks. 


Mike Vilardi 


T'B'Dellyi'Mai (“People’s Freedom Ak’Ar, leader of the Gor’Jen’Ar. E’Sar became 
Action Council”) disillusioned (or maybe “impatient” is the better 


S'Ten Gali Ak’Ar, leader of the Gor'Jen’Ar,  WOrd) with Ak’Ar's long-term planning 
quietly believes thatthe T'B'Dellyi'Maiisagreater Why depend erp aitasin s?” B = 5 gier: 
danger to the Gorothite people as a whole than is Off-worlders have brought only trouble. Gorot 
the Empire. Conversely, most members of the should be for Gorothites only; Gorothites should 


T’B'Dellyi’Mai consider the Gor’Jen’Ar members ee Riches vg oakland h 
to be sell-outs and cowards of the highest order, eye Dene SEN, HE h roke from the 
writing their piddly little manifestos and dealing Gor'Jen’Ar, taking many of that organization's 


: i young firebrands with him. 
ápan cue TO than beikigaskols He has created the T’B’Dellyi’Mai as a more 


militant group than the Gor’Jen’Ar, although it 

Goals follows a similar structure: it has the same cells- 
Thestated goalofthe T’B’Dellyi’Maiistomake Of-three structure (although E’Sar is less strin- 
Goroth ungovernablefortheEmpire,andtomake gent about keeping to that format). The 
it no longer economically feasible to extract T’B'Dellyi’Mai has fewer members (probably less 
hyperbarides. They willachievethis goalthrough than 1,000) but it has “chapters” in all of the 


out-and-out terrorism: sabotage, selectiveassas- | Major o’bekis and is thought to have “loyalists” 
sination, and civil insurrection. in the client-worker barracks of many Imperial 


2 facilities. 
History and Organization 


The current leader, E’Sar G’Go B’Kul, was once Recent Activity and Future Plans 
a student — perhaps “disciple” — of S'Ten Gali Over the last several years, the T’B'Dellyi’Mai 


58 Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


oF rrr Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


E’Sar G'Go B’Kul 


Type: Gorothite Terrorist Leader 

DEXTERITY 4D 

Blaster 5D, brawling parry 5D+1, dodge 5D, firearms 5D, grenade 4D+2, melee 
combat 5D, melee combat: walking stave 6D, melee parry 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Alien species 3D, cultures: Gorothite 7D, intimidation 5D, streetwise 5D, 
streetwise: Graith 7D, survival 5D, survival: Goroth badlands 7D, tactics: 
squads 6D 

MECHANICAL 3D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Cesa 5D+2, command 4D, command: T'B'Dellyi’Mai members 5D, hide 6D, 
investigation 4D, persuasion 5D, search 4D+1, sneak 5D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Demolition 5D 

Special Abilities: 

Hyperbaride Immunity: Gorothites are less affected by the contaminants in 
the air, water and food of their world. 


Smell: +1D to search skill when tracking by scent. 

Force Points: 2 

Character Points: 9 

Move: 13 

Equipment: Lightning gun (5D+2), Hammer slug-thrower (3D+2), walking 
stave (STR+1D), 2 grenades (5D), comlink, breath mask 


Capsule: E’Sar G’Go B’Kul is young, arrogant and very aggressive. 
Patience has always come hard for him, and this is reflected in the 
operations of the T’B’Dellyi’Mai. Still, he seems to have an intuitive 
grasp of insurrection and terrorist tactics. The fact that his group 
still exists and that he still has his freedom is sufficient evidence of 
this. 

He hates off-worlders with a passion, generalizing from his 
experience with the Imperials and the corporations — a kind of “If 
you've seen one off-worlder, you've seen them all” attitude. The 
only way he might trust off-worlders is if they come bearing a stash 
of heavy weapons. He is currently hiding out somewhere in the cliff 
dwellings of Graith. 


Mike Vilardi 


has been behind maybe two dozen significant 
incidents of sabotage. This does not count per- 
haps a hundred incidental acts of trivial “mon- 
key-wrenching.” Water filters feeding corporate 
pressures have been compromised. Stockpiles 
of important raw materials have been burned or 
blown up. Most seriously, a bomb was planted 
aboard an Imperial cargo GEV that was carrying 
replacement security personnel toahyperbaride 
extraction site; the bomb was discovered before 
it went off, but only through sheer luck. 

The T’B’Dellyi'Mai intends to escalate its cam- 
paign of violence and destruction as soon as it 
can get its collective hands on more weapons 
and demolition equipment. Leader B’Kul has 
heard Ak’Ar’s dire warnings of genocide many 
times, but he always discounts them as the fear- 
mongering of a coward. 


K'Len J'Bar Kasoon (“Rightful 
Vengeance of the Mother”) 
The newest major resistance group is K’Len 
J’Bar Kasoon, or “Rightful Vengeance of the 
Mother.” As the overblown metaphysical title 


might imply, this group is less grounded in the 
ugly realities of the Imperial occupation than the 
T'B’Dellyi’Mai. As the T’B’Dellyi’Mai split off in 
protest of the “inaction” of the Gor’Jen’Ar, so has 
K’Len J'Bar Kasoon split off from the T’B’Dellyi’ Mai 
to protest their “lack of faith” in the religious 
pronouncements of their leader, B’Yen Do V'nel. 


Goals 


The central goal of K’Len J’Bar Kasoon is to rid 
the planet ofall off-worlders rightnow! This “Grand 
Task” comprises three main parts: to make Goroth 
ungovernable for the Empire (here, they agree 
with the T’B’Dellyi’Mai); to rouse the entire 
Gorothite populace in armed insurrection; and 
to mobilize the “spiritual forces” of the planet 
itself. 


History and Organization 


This last purpose is based on the rather un- 
conventional religious beliefs of B’Yen Do V’nel, 
the venerable — and quite possibly senile — last 
survivor of the once-numerous j’ber B’Yen. Some 
of his enemies have speculated that if perhaps he 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


59 


were not the last survivor of the j'ber, he would 
do the “polite thing” and “walk the Way to the 
next life.” 

B’Yen has taken the orthodoxy of the “True 
Faith” as preached by j’ber V’Sook, and added a 
strange twist. The Scouring and the Imperial 
occupation areall trials sent to test the Gorothites, 
he agrees. However, he says the way to “pass” 
the test is not to quietly endure. 

“The Spirit of Goroth helps those who help 
themselves,” B’Yen believes. If the people of 
Goroth march forth “in faith and honor” — pre- 
sumably, with him in their vanguard — the mys- 
terious “Life Spirit” of Goroth itself will rouse 
itself and fight on their behalf. And how could 
mere off-worlders, mortal as they are, fight against 
a planetary Life Spirit? 

B’Yen’s task, then, is to rouse the entire 
Gorothite population to rebel against the Impe- 
rial oppressors. The only way he can see of doing 
this is through leading by example. If he and his 
followers strike hard and often — and spectacu- 
larly — against the occupation, then the rest of 
his people will get the idea and follow. To help 
him, B’Yen has gathered around him a central 
cadre of “true believers” — in other words, 
Gorothites as fanatical as himself — in his home 
o’beki of A’Lenba. Estimates of total membership 
in K’Len J’Bar Kasoon range from 50 or so, down 
to just B’Yen himself and a dozen close confi- 
dants. 


Recent Activity and Future Plans 


The central purpose of K’Len J’Bar Kasoon is 
to “raise the populace” — to attract attention to 
its cause and its campaign — not necessarily to 
cause direct and serious damage to the oppres- 
sors. After all, any damage they manage to inflict 
will seem irrelevant when the planetary Life Spirit 
is finally on the march! Thus, the organization's 
raids have been designed to attract attention 
more than anything else. Why, other than atten- 
tion, would “terrorists” sneak into a vehicle em- 
placement and do nothing but paint a TIE fighter 
bright blue? 

Of course, sometimes nothing attracts quite 
so much attention as a nice, loud bang. Over the 
last couple of months, K’Len J’Bar Kasoon has 
been blowing things up in and around A'Lenba. 
Their targets have not been predominately stra- 
tegic, so the Empire is not really feeling much 
pain from their campaign. But you can bet the 
Imperials and corporate executives are a little 
edgy about what the terrorists might choose to 
blow up next. 


m B’Yen Do V'nel 
Type: Gorothite Fanatic 
DEXTERITY 1D+2 
Dodge 3D, firearms 2D, melee combat 2D, melee parry 2D 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation D A AA ees 


ARS™ 


KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Alien species 3D, cultures 3D, streetwise 3D, streetwise: 
A'Lenba 5D, survival 3D, willpower 6D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Command 4D, command: “true believers” 6D, hide 3D, 
persuasion 5D, sneak 3D+1 

STRENGTH 1D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Special Abilities: 

Hyperbaride Immunity: Gorothites are less affected by.the 
contaminants in the air, water and food of their world. 
Smell: +1D to search skill when tracking by scent. 
Senile; B’Yen Do V’nel is a fanatic and dangerously inco- 
herent. He is prone to be as dangerous to himself as the 
Imperial occupation troops. 

Character Points: 6 

Move: 8 (due to advanced age) : 
Equipment: Walking stave (STR+1D), breath mask 
Capsule: When he talks about his revelations, B’Yen 
is incredibly persuasive. (True, unshakable beliefis 
often persuasive, regardless of how nonsensical 
the subject of that belief may be!) 

The only time that B’Yen seems to be truly alive 
is when is his preaching (and he preaches a /ot). 
Between diatribes, he sinks into a sullen silence, 
looking around him suspiciously. He is a borderline 
paranoid, trusting only those “true believers” clos- 
est to him ... and not always all of them. 

B'Yenis more than 123 local years old (he thinks). 
It seems that only his indomitable will is stopping 
him from dying of old age. 


The Rebel Alliance 


Up until the last year or so, the Rebel Alliance 
has had no real presence on Goroth (although it 
has been keeping tabs on the situation through 
various channels). Now, however, the Rebel lead- 
ership has decided that Goroth is strategically 
important enough to warrant “on-site monitor- 
ing.” 
Rebel strategists would love to wrest the 
hyperbaride supplies of Goroth away from the 
Empire. Unfortunately, there is no way the Alli- 
ance could divert sufficient assets to take Goroth 
and keep it. While a Rebel fleet could take out the 
two Imperial Star Destroyers in orbit — albeit 
with difficulty — it would not be long before 
reinforcements arrived to take Goroth back. 

Several strategists have suggested supporting 
the native resistance movement with equipment 
and even personnel. However, the Alliance must 
walk the same knife-edge as the Gor’Jen’Ar. Too 
little support or pressure, and the Empire’s source 
of hyperbarides is left intact; too much support 
or pressure, and the Gorothite civilization is 
wiped from the face of the planet. 


Goals 


The Alliance has yet to decide exactly how to 
handle Goroth. How much support for the under- 
ground and pressure on the Imperials would be 
too much? The only way to answer that question 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


mT 
-WA 


Lt. Jered Pole 
Type: Rebel Undercover Operative 
DEXTERITY 3D 


Blaster 5D+1, blaster: hold-out blaster 6D+1, brawling parry 5D, dodge 
5D, melee combat 4D+1, melee parry 4D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 

Alien species 5D, business 4D, cultures 4D, languages 4D, streetwise 5D, 
survival 4D, willpower 4D 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Communications 4D, repulsorlift operation 4D+2, space transports 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Command 5D, con 6D, forgery 4D, gambling 5D, hide 4D, investigation 
6D, persuasion 4D, sneak 5D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 7D, stamina 4D 

TECHNICAL 2D+2 

Demolition 5D, first aid 5D, security 6D 

Force Points: 2 

Character Points: 14 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, breath mask, datapad, 
envirosuit, blast vest (+1 energy, +1D physical), V'Jar Technologies 
Silver Falcon rotorcraft 


Capsule: Lt. Jered Pole is known as an up-and-comer within the 
Rebel Alliance — one of the “young warriors” who will guide the 
future of the Alliance. He is a trained and experienced merce- 
nary who joined the Alliance two years ago for the “salary” of 
one credit per year — after all, it wouldn’t look good for a 
mercenary to work for free. When he heard about Operation 
Starbird, he was the first to volunteer. 

Pole is on Goroth posing as a professional gambler by the 
name of Jerth Merin. Heis a frequent player in the official casino 
in the Graith civilian pressure complex, and holds illicit, high- 


stakes sabacc games in his hotel room. He is currently discuss- 
ing with Colonial Governor Marsh Limoth the possibility of a 
“syndicate” of his confederates investing in a lavishly-fur- 
nished new casino, designed to bring profit to both “Merin” and 
Limoth. Limoth is interested in at least hearing more, and so he 
has told security to turn a blind eye to “Merin” and his sabacc 
games. 


Jered Pole is in his late 30s, a smoothly handsome 
man with dark hair, olive complexion, and dark eyes. 
He moves slowly, almost lazily, as though he cannot 
be bothered to move fast. This is like the “lethargy” 
of an efficient predator, however. When necessary, 
he can move blindingly fast, and kill an enemy with 
his bare hands before his target can react. 


accurately, the Rebel leadership believes, is to 
have investigative assets on the planet. Thus, the 
Alliance has begun “Operation Starbird”: over 
the last six months or so, almost a dozen Rebel 
agents have made the trip to Goroth. They have 
traveled as salespeople, as management consult- 
ants, as entrepreneurs, even as professional gam- 
blers (sometimes it is wise to hide a major crime 
behind the mask of a minor one). They are doing 
what they can to integrate themselves with the 
off-worlder population of Goroth, and develop 
communication channels with the natives where 
possible. Other operatives, acting as couriers, 
shuttle back and forth to the planet as “transient 
workers” and the like, returning their reports to 
the Rebel leadership. 

The main goal for the forces on Goroth is to 
develop enough military and economic intelli- 
gence to let Alliance command determine a ratio- 
nal plan for handling Goroth. While doing so, 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


however, they have some autonomy. If they see 
an opportunity to strike a blow against the Em- 
pire—without compromising their own mission, 
or seriously risking the Gorothite population at 
large — they are free to take it. Similarly, they 
have the freedom to deal with the native resis- 
tance movements as they see fit. If it seems wise, 
they can provide support; if it appears that the 
Gorothites are going to do something stupid that 
will bring the wrath of the Empire down on their 
heads, they can move to stop it. Thus, depending 
on the situation, the Rebel agents might find 
themselves working with Gorothite freedom-fight- 
ers ... or sometimes against them. 


Past Activities and Future Plans 


The information-gathering phase of “Opera- 
tion Starbird” is scheduled to be a standard year 
long. So far, the investigative assets have been in 
place and operating for only two to three months 


Chapter Six: The Present Situation 


» A 


Z-[\—S 
pers 


VF J 


IM a re 


ae 


a epee Ve 


te Bat 
E ata 


EJ 


H=] 


EE A typical pressure with connecting movators. 


(the first three months of the operation were 
spent setting up the basic network). After the 
year, the operatives’ next task will depend en- 
tirely on Alliance command's decisions based on 
the information that has been gathered. 

Several of the “Operation Starbird” agents 
have developed tenuous connections with the 
Gor’Jen’Ar. Starbird’s on-planet commander, one 
Lt. Jered Pole, has authorized his people to sup- 
port the Gor’Jen’Ar’s “manifesto” projects wher- 
ever possible, and to aid in suborning or compro- 
mising corporate managers and executives. Sev- 
eral Gor’Jen’Ar members have sent word to 
Starbird operatives, asking for any and all intelli- 
gence Pole and his people have gathered. So far, 
Pole has been cautious about releasing this intel- 
ligence fearing it would compromise his own 
team. 


fee 


7 y 
H liga “i F hai EE -o 


AR— 
ARS 


AAR 


TVEL 


17 
il 


i 


p E 


N 


L , 
SS 


Assets 


There are currently nine or 10 Operation 
Starbird assets on Goroth Prime. The number 
fluctuates, as personnel rotate on-and off-planet, 
as required by their covers. 

Some know each other’s real and cover identi- 
ties, locations, and personal missions. Others 
are known merely by code-names and details of 
blind-letter drops for message transfer. Still oth- 
ers do not know of each other's existence. These 
security provisions are decided upon by the 
Rebel commanders in ultimate charge of Opera- 
tion Starbird. The on-site mission commander, 
Lt. Pole, is not thrilled that even he does not know 
the identities of all the agents supposedly under 
his control, but he also understands the need for 
secrecy. 


62 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—iT: 
-WA 


Chapter Seven 
Major Settlements 


Common Elements 


All of the major o’bekis have at least three 
major elements in common: pressures, movators 
and “people-movers.” 


Pressures 


Whether corporate or Imperial, these follow 
the same basic design. Pressures are rigid, rein- 
forced domes — either geodesic in design, or 
smoothly hemispherical. They are basically cir- 
cular in floorplan, although sometimes they are 
combined in clusters, looking from the air like a 
group of soap-bubbles. They range in size from 
20 meters in diameter to well over 100 meters in 
diameter. For all purposes, they are classed as 
walker scale. 

Depending on the purpose of an individual 
pressure, it might be constructed of duralumin, 
an opaque and shiny metal, or of transparisteel, 
a translucent or even transparent synthetic. Du- 
ralumin domes have a Strength of 3D (walker 
scale) for resisting damage; transparisteel domes 
have a Strength of 2D. The more resilient — and 
more expensive—duralumin domes are reserved 
for critical emplacements (such as the Colonial 
Governor’s residence). 

All but the oldest and most primitive domes — 
the ones first constructed when the Imperials 
initially landed — have limited self-sealing fea- 
tures. A breach up to one meter in diameter will 
automatically seal itself with polyresin extruded 
from a network of high-pressure “capillaries.” 
This process takes onlysix seconds. The polyresin 
seal is much less resilient than the original struc- 
ture, however — after all, it is only designed to 
prevent contamination of the pressure’s con- 
trolled atmosphere. A seal has a Strength of 3D+1 
(speeder scale) to resist damage. 

Most pressures have double-door airlocks that 
provide access to the outside. For domes with- 
out external airlocks, the only access is through 
the tubes of movators and people-movers that 
connect them to other pressures. These airlocks 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


are strongly-built (corporate and Imperial de- 
signers anticipated the possibility of terrorist 
attacks targeting them); thus, consider them as 
blast doors for the purposes of resisting damage 
(8D Strength in character scale). 

The rooms and corridors within pressures are 
always compartmentalized, and always have 
chem-sniffers installed every dozen meters or so. 
If the dome is breached and a particular area is 
contaminated, airtight doors (Strength 3D, speeder 
scale) will immediately whoosh shut to contain 
the leak. Normally, these doors cannot be opened 
until the contaminants are removed by the air 
processing systems. Authorized personnel — 
ranking officers, or senior managers — can over- 
ride this lock-out if necessary, although they will 
rarely risk their own lives by doing so. 


Movators 


These are moving walk-ways that pass through 
elevated tubes, connecting separate pressures. 
Movator tubes are built of transparisteel (Strength 
2D, walker scale). They have no self-sealing sys- 
tems; if a movator tube is breached, blast doors 
(Strength 3D, speeder scale) instantly slam shut 
at both ends, isolating the pressures (and possi- 
bly dooming anyone unfortunate enough to be 
riding the movator at the moment). A tube will 
contain one or two moving walk-ways. These 
belts normally move at a speed of 1.5 meters per 
second; if an alarm is triggered, the speed can be 
increased to 2.5 meters per second. This speed is 
added to — or subtracted from — the movement 
of a character riding on the belt (depending on 
whether he is moving with or against the motion 
of the belt). Movator belts are flanked by waist- 
high dividers, the duraplast handrails of which 
move at the same rate as the belts. These divid- 
ers are Strength 3D (character scale). They pro- 
vide anywhere from no cover to 1/2 cover for a 
standing rider (depending on where the attack is 
coming from), and riders ducking down behind 
them can receive full cover. 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements 


Movators are not particularly resilient; they 
do not have to be since they are never exposed to 
the elements. Their mechanisms have a Strength 
of 3D+2 (character scale) for resisting damage, 
and heavy damage will wreck them until they are 
repaired. 


“People-Movers” 


People-movers travel through much the same 
elevated transparisteel tunnels as movators 
(Strength 2D, walker scale), and have the same 
blast doors (Strength 3D, speeder scale) that 
immediately slam shut if the tube is breached. 
The actual mechanism is considerably more so- 
phisticated, however. 

People-movers are actually small monorails 
— open or semi-enclosed autonomous vehicles 
running on a powered track imbedded in the 
floor. A people-mover tunnel — the same size as 
a movator tunnel — has room for only one track. 
In a complex, pressures are connected by a 
people-mover system that follows a roughly cir- 
cular route. Depending on the length of this 
route, there can be two, three or even more 
people-mover “cars” running on the track. These 
cars are autonomous; each is controlled by a 
simple-minded, task-designated fifth-degree droid 
whose sole job is to avoid running down “organ- 
ics” who might happen to wander into the way. 
On a people-mover route, there might be half a 
dozen or more “embark/debark sites” — loca- 
tions where each vehicle will always stop, to let 
people on or off. In most systems, a car will stop 
at each and every stop, whether or not someone 
wants to get on or off, simply because doing it 
this way makes sure the multiple cars always 
stay the correct distance apart. Again depending 
on the length of the route and number of cars, a 
vehicle will stop at a given embark/debark site 
every two or three minutes. 

Inan emergency, authorized personnel —rank- 
ing officers, or senior managers — can “comman- 
deer” a people-mover car, and override the droid’s 
normal programming. Even so, a car's freedom of 


EE Graith 


w Facts at a Glance 
Total Population: 25,200,000 (approx.) 
Species Breakdown: Gorothite: 99+%, Human and other: 
<1% 


Overview 
Graith is the most populous (and the most 
important) o’beki on the planet. It is home to the 
the P’Dar’Ken (the Gorothite planetary council), 
the Colonial Government, and the site of the 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements ee) a 


ARS 


action is limited by the fact that there are autono- 
mous vehicles ahead of it and behind it on the 
closed route. There are facilities to remove cars 
from service and put new ones in: small side 
tracks off the main route run into maintenance 
areas. It takes at least 15 minutes to remove or 
replace a car. 

People-mover vehicles travel at a standard 
speed of 50 kilometers per hour (Move: 18), 
accelerated silently by their linear induction 
motors. 

There aretwo standard types of people-mover 
cars: passenger cars and cargo cars. Passenger 
cars are partially enclosed — more for aesthetic 
reasons than for any real requirement. Cargo 
cars, on the other hand, are open — simply flat 
load-bearing panels, with a droid at the front. 
Specific people-mover routes might have differ- 
ent types of cars — for example, there are recur- 
ring rumors that military installations can quickly 
put reinforced “armed response” cars into ser- 
vice — but if they exist, these cars are almost 
never seen. 


m Minas-Lergo PM-3B Passenger Car 
Craft: M-L PM-3B Passenger Car 
Type: People-mover vehicle 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 9 meters 
Crew: 1 (droid) 

Passengers: 14 

Cargo Capacity: 200 kilograms 
Cover: 1/2 

Cost: 10,000 

Move: 18; 50 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D+1 

m Minas-Lergo PM-7C Cargo Car 
Craft: M-L PM-7C Cargo Car 
Type: People-mover vehicle 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 9 meters 
Crew: | (droid) 

Passengers: 2 

Cargo Capacity: 5 metric tons 
Cost: 8,000 

Move: 18; 50 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D+1 


corporate headquarters of the various mining 
rights holders. Like all major o’bekis, Graith com- 
bines elements of traditional Gorothite settle- 
ments (“traditional” since the Scouring, at least) 
with cutting-edge Imperial hostile-environment 
outpost technology. 

Graith is located in a deep rift valley in the 
middle ofa high plateau, surrounded by high and 
jagged mountain-ranges. This valley is approxi- 
mately 30 kilometers long, five kilometers across 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


eR cer Chapter Seven: Major Settlements 


-WA 


atits widest point, and ranges from 200 meters to 
500 meters deep. The valley is a jagged scar 
carved into the rock of the plateau. Its sides are 
steep — 45 degrees at their shallowest pitch — 
and in some areas vertical. 

The Gorothites have carved narrow, 
switchback paths into the rock walls in many 
places (where the pitch allows, of course). Some 
of these have been widened and reinforced by 
the Empire to make the paths safe for low-alti- 
tude repulsorlift and ground vehicles. In many 
places, streams plunge from the cliff tops, arch- 
ing out and down in graceful waterfalls. The 
water collects in the small lake known as V’Bren 
Goh (“Bitter Tarn”). From the lake, anarrow river 
flows roughly southward, to plunge into a sink- 
hole and join a larger, subterranean river that 
flows beneath the southern mountains. 

Some of these waterfall streams have been 
diverted by simple dams and structures to pro- 
vide water to the central filtration units that 
serve the Gorothite residences. The Imperial and 
corporate facilities are served by high-volume 
pipes that draw water directly from V’Bren Goh, 
and run it through more elaborate filter com- 
plexes. 


Graith Locations 


1. Starport 


A military-grade facility, this is located on the 
plateau above the valley. The Empire would pre- 
fer to have their Starport nearer to the heart of 
things — for security reasons as much as for 
convenience — but the lay of the land prohibits 
this. 

High blast walls surround the installation — 
purportedly to protect the enclave population 
from any mishaps, but actually to minimize secu- 
rity problems. There is a single gate allowing 
access through the blast walls, opening out onto 
the top of the cliffs at the beginning of the only 
major road leading down into the valley. Corpo- 
rate employees sarcastically term this road 
“Grand Avenue,” after the triumphal procession- 
route of that name on Chandrila. 

The port is divided into two sections — an 
Imperial military facility, and the very much 
smaller civilian facility. Electrified security fences 
separate the two facilities, and the Imperial area 
is patrolled round-the-clock by a dozen Rim Secu- 
rities’ K7 “Black Dagger” security droids (modi- 
fied to resist the radiation flux). 


m K7 Security Droid 
Type: Rim Securities’ K7 “Black Dagger” Security Droid 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Blaster 8D, dodge 7D, running 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Search 4D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipped With: 

e Two auto-balance legs 

* Two arms 

* Body armor: +2D energy and physical to all locations 
* Internal blaster rifle (5D damage, ranges: 5-30/100/200) 
Move: 12 

Size: 1.7 meters tall 

Cost: Not for sale 


Additional security is provided by customs 
officials. They are equipped with breath masks, 
of course. Although generally armed just with 
blaster pistols and grenades, these personnel 
have access to extensive armories. Should the 
situation warrant, they can bring heavy weapons 
into play, up to and including E-web blasters. 


w Typical Goroth Customs Official 
Type: Goroth Customs Official 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Blaster 4D+1, dodge 4D+1, grenade 3D+2, vehicle blasters 
3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Law enforcement 3D, intimidation 3D, willpower 3D+1 
MECHANICAL 1D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 


TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Security 4D 

Character Points: Varies, typically 0-5 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Blast helmet (+1 energy, +1D physical), blast 
vest (+l energy, +1D physical), blaster pistol (4D), comlink, 
breath mask 


A central control tower, operated by military 
personnel, coordinates and controls all incom- 
ing and outgoing flights. In the military area, 
there are hangers and shelters for maintenance 
and repair of ships. However, unless undergoing 
work, all ships are parked in the large “duty 
hanger,” ready to be “scrambled” at a moment's 
notice. At any given time, two 12-ship squadrons 
of TIE/In fighters are stationed in TIE racks in the 
duty hanger. There are also usually a couple of 
Tribune-class shuttles. 

On the civilian side, there are most of the 
facilities to be expected at acommercial starport: 
docking bays, service facilities, even asmall (and 
well-policed!) tavern. At any given time, there are 
half a dozen or so transports of various types on 
the ground. Most transports are corporate- 
owned, bearing the livery of their megacorp. 
There may well be an “independent” ship or two, 
of course, either performing contract work for a 
smaller corp, or on Goroth for the captain’s own 
(perhaps shady) reasons. 

All civilian vessels undergo an extensive cus- 
toms search on landing, performed by well-trained 
military personnel. These same personnel con- 
duct spotchecks on departure as well, examining 


on average one in 10 ships. Ships wishing to 
depart must file a departure plan with the control 
tower, and receive a “boost time.” Ships that take 
off before their designated boost time are auto- 
matically considered to be in violation of Impe- 
rial law; three or four TIE fighters are launched to 
pursue, and force the ship to return for “process- 
ing.” 


m Tribune Shuttle 
Craft: Sienar Fleet Systems Tribune-class Shuttle 
Type: Light shuttle 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 18.5 meters 
Skill: Space transports: Tribune shuttle 
Crew: 3, skeleton: 1/+10 
Crew Skill: Space transports 4D 
Passengers: 14 
Cargo Capacity: 30 metric tons 
Consumables: 3 weeks 
Cost: 150,000 (new), but generally for sale only to the 
military and corporations 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Hyperdrive Backup: x15 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Space: 5 
Atmosphere: 295; 850 kmh 
Hull: 3D 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements === N A Fees 


ARS 


Shields: 1D 

Sensors: 
Passive: 30/0D 
Scan: 50/1D 
Search: 75/2D 
Focus: 5/3D 


2. “Grand Avenue” 


The major access route connecting theStarport 
and the o’beki itself, this road is steep but kept in 
excellent repair. There are no guardrails, how- 
ever, and the faint-of-heart should avoid glancing 
over the edge. 

“Grand Avenue” is 10 meters wide for most of 
its length. Around the clock, modified 
landspeeders and hover and ground vehicles 
shuttle back and forth along its length, ferrying 
cargo and personnel. An enterprising Gorothite 
j’ber has set up a pay-per-ride “taxi service” to 
shuttle civilian newcomers to and from the 
Starport. A one-way trip costs five credits per 
person (haggling is appropriate), with negoti- 
ated surcharges for cargo. As yet, Colonial Gov- 
ernor Limoth has made no moves to nationalize 
this service. 


Into The Warrens 


From the personal diary of Lt. Yrul Tash, 
Imperial Army 


“The warrens.” That’s what we call them, 
me and my squad-mates. It doesn’t begin to 
describe what it’s like down there. 

I know what’s in my personnel docket. My 
last CO let me have a look. It’s a clear record, 
no demerits, no discommendations, no repri- 
mands. But I got transferred here anyway. 
Where's the justice in that? I was born on 
Jalarren— big world, lots of space. You go out 
into the salt deserts, and you're the tallest 
thing between you and the horizon. Open 
space! 

For someone with my background, going 
down into the warrens is like torture — cruel 
and unusual punishment. There's no space to 
move, no space to breathe. And everywhere 
you look, you're surrounded by those lizards, 
looking at you with their creepy eyes. Whis- 
pering about you behind your back in that 
disgusting language of theirs. Probably plan- 
ning just how to sucker you away from the rest 
of your squad and kill you. 

Let me tell you what it’s like. The tunnels 
are low — which is weird, if you think about it. 
The lizards are bigger than we are, even in all 
our gear. But for some reason, they don’t mind 
having to bend almost double to get through 


some ofthe corridors. You know, it’s almost as 
though they’re so primitive they don’t mind 
going back to walking on all-fours sometimes. 

It’s dark in the warrens. There's glowlights 
on the corridor walls, but they’re lizard 
glowlights — dim and too red. Everything 
looks like it’s soaked in blood. The corridors 
are narrow, twisting and turning, and com- 
bined with the darkness they cut visibility 
down to a few meters. That’s probably the 
scariest thing of all. No fire-lanes — if it came 
down toa fight, dozens of the lizards, hundreds 
of them, could be hiding around a corner five 
meters away, and even if you knew they were 
there, you couldn’t shoot them. 

It’s hot, too. Hot and clammy. And the air 
smells. Well, I imagine it'd smell; we breathe 
suit air all the time we’re down there. 

And there's lizards everywhere. Everywhere. 
They try to get out of your way when you walk 
by —they pretend to be scared of us, most of 
them — but the corridors are so narrow, you 
have to brush by them. You feel their hands 
brushing against your armor, looking for a 
weak spot where they can drive a knife in. 

People in the government say they’re paci- 
fied. They say the warrens are secured, I say 
come down with me on patrol one day and see 
for yourself. You'll change your mind. 


—EE——————— EEE 


Goroth; Slave of the Empire 


oF Pc Hapter Seven: Major Settlements 
-WARS 


Under Pressure 


D'Trel B’Krel D'Naz speaks of the pressures 
to his j’ber ... 


It is cold inside the pressures. The air is 
thin, and the processing equipment strips the 
air of the scent of other B’Dellyi. It is a lonely, 
alien place to go. 

The Humans — they so relish space: high 
ceilings, wide corridors. Such waste of pre- 
cious space. They like their metal, too. Walls, 
ceilings, floors —all are metal, in many places. 
The lights — already too bright — glint and 
gleam off all that polished metal. It hurts the 
eyes. And the echoes: every sound seems to 
reverberate off the metal surfaces, never fall- 
ing totally silent. 

One can recognize the different Humans 
quickly. The security guards — they are al- 
ways there, always watching — stand and 
move as though they are always ready to kill. 

The government functionaries carry them- 


3. Other Major Roads 


These have also been widened and reinforced 
by the Empire. 


4. Gorothite Cliff Dwellings 


In many places along the cliff walls are com- 
plexes of caves; about half of Graith’s natives 
make their homes in the caves. Gorothites prefer 
high population densities — much higher than 
Humans would relish — and do not need much 
personal space. As elsewhere on the planet, most 
of the Gorothites of higher status — personal or 
j’ber — live in the cliff dwellings. 


5. V'Bren Goh (“Bitter Tarn”) 
This small lake is fed by two major rivers, 
which are, in turn, fed by numerous cliff water- 
falls. 


6. Gorothite Subterranean Dwellings 


Accessways to the subterranean complexes 
— appearing as low structures built from native 
rock—dot the valley floor. Population density is 
even higher in the subterranean areas than in the 
cliffs above them. Most businesses are run by 
and for Gorothites — restaurants, kefa houses, 
and the like — and are located in the subterra- 
nean areas, rather than in the cliff dwellings. 
These subterranean areas are divided into “neigh- 
borhoods.” Each neighborhood has one or two 
accessways to the surface. Small tunnels interlink 
some neighborhoods, although this is not a uni- 
versal feature. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


selves with pride and arrogance, like mem- 
bers of a j'ber with much status. 

The people of their “companies” are always 
looking around them, as though they antici- 
pate ambush — not from the B’Dellyi, but from 
members of other megacorporations. One can 
almost smell their fear. 

And then there are the other off-worlders — 
the gamblers and the traders. They are few, 
but they seem to fill the space with their talk 
and their laughter, Perhaps it is for them that 
the ceilings are so high, the corridors so wide 
... they seem determined to take up as much 
personal space as possible. 

I feel most at home in the markets. The 
B'Dellyi try to build narrow, low corridors 
with their stalls and barrows. When | walk 
through the markets, I feel B’Dellyi close by 
me, around me. | can smell the skin of my 
people. 


7. P’Dar’Ken Hall 


This is a utilitarian building constructed on 
the surface (counter to most Gorothite tradi- 
tions). It is built of native rock, reinforced and 
embellished here and there with metals and syn- 
thetic resins. It is not connected to any of the 
underground neighborhoods. 

It was built at the instructions of Colonial 
Governor Limoth (apparently, he is more com- 
fortable having the native government ina single 
building that could, as needed, be surrounded by 
troops). The members of the P’Dar’Ken and their 
immediate families live within this large building. 
There is also an audience hall, a large open area 
where the P’Dar’Ken actually holds its meetings. 


8. Colonial Government Pressure 


This large, reinforced pressure complex is 
home to Colonial Governor Limoth, his wife and 
daughter, and the bureaucrats who run the real 
government of Goroth Prime. Its current comple- 
ment numbers over 2,000, but it can easily sup- 
port an additional 1,000 beings on top of that. 

The pressure is guarded around the clock by 
a squad of 24 Imperial Army troopers. They are 
armed with light weapons only, but have access 
to heavy weapons in an emergency. A detach- 
ment of 20 Goroth Planetary Police is always 
ready to respond to trouble, however, and can be 
on-site in under five minutes from the moment an 
alarm is raised. 


9. TaggeCo Corporate Facility 


Unusually elaborate in design, this complex of 
pressures puts the Colonial Government facility 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements «=== fe eee 
ARS 


Graith 


Buildings are exaggerated 
for clarity 


En 
PaA 000 


68 Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


oe AR Chg ter Seven: Major Settlements 


-WA 


to shame (which is, in fact, quite representative 
of the way things work on Goroth). Corporate 
workers live in the outlying domes, while the 
central offices of the corporation are located in 
the central pressure. There are almost 1,000 
TaggeCo employees in this facility alone. Secu- 
rity is provided by Imperial Army troopers, “sec- 
onded” to the corporation. 


10. Karflo Corporation Facility 


This is smaller than the TaggeCo facility, but 
still quite impressive. Although Karflo rivals 
TaggeCo in influence on Goroth, corporate poli- 
cies keep the number of personnel relatively low. 
More functions are performed by computers and 
automated systems, which keeps the occupancy 
down around 500 people. Security is provided by 
Karflo’s own personnel. 


m Typical Karflo Security Officer 
Type: Security Officer 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, dodge 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Business 2D+1, business: Karflo Corporation 4D, intimida- 
tion 3D, streetwise 4D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 3D, command 3D, search 3D+2 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
Brawling 3D+2 
TECHNICAL 1D+1 
Character Points: Varies, typically 0-5 


Move: 10 

Equipment: Blast helmet (+1 energy, +1D physical), blast 
vest (+1 energy, +1D physical), blaster carbine (5D), 
comlink, breath mask 


11. Trigdale Metallurgy and Vaufthau 
Processing Industries Pressure 


The two secondary rights-holders share a 
single pressure complex in Graith. Security is 
provided by Karflo security personnel on con- 
tract to the two corporations. 


12. Multi-Corporate Complex 


The half-dozen or so other corporations that 
hold subsidiary rights share a somewhat primi- 
tive complex near the Bitter Tarn. Security is 
provided by Imperial Army soldiers (for which 
the companies must pay the Colonial Governor), 


13. Civilian Pressure 


This complex contains rather spartan hotels, 
and “packaged” office complexes for traveling 
businesspeople and entrepreneurs. The Central 
Concourseincludes acouple of restaurants, some 
stores and equipment suppliers, and a small — 
and exceptionally well-policed — casino. Unlike 
many casinos on other out-of-the-way worlds, 
the games here are all fair. Predictably, the Colo- 
nial Government slaps a “luxury tax” of 10% on all 
winnings. Further, a 2% “house fee” is taken from 
the wager of all games. 


EE Goroth’s harsh weather makes flying extremely dangerous. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Mike Vilardi 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements 


ITB TT Pry nay 
= 


— 


Dan & David Day 


70 Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


i PRs CNA pter Seven: Major Settlements 


-WA 


Not all gambling in this complex is officially 
sanctioned, however. Professional gamblers some- 
times visit Graith and set up high-stakes “floating” 
sabacc and other games in their rooms. 

This is the only pressure where native Gorothites 
are free to enter and leave as they see fit. All of the 
businesses are run by Humans and other off-world 
species, although many of the menial tasks are 
performed by Gorothites. Security is provided by 
Imperial Army troopers on detached duty from the 
Colonial Governor's garrison. Individual businesses 
can and do supplement their own security with 
personnel they hire on their own. 


14. Power Generator 


This facility uses geothermal power — of which 
Goroth has asurplus —to supply the energy needs 
of the entire o’beki. Separate circuits handle the 
corporate and Imperial pressures, and the Gorothite 
residences. If necessary, a computer command 
from the Colonial Government's central system 
can shut down all power to the cliff dwellings and 
subterranean neighborhoods without affecting the 
power supply to the pressure complexes. Since it 
is of such strategic importance, the power genera- 
tor is guarded by a detachment of 25 Goroth Plan- 
etary Police. Six heavy-weapon emplacements 
mount E-web repeating blasters. Air defense is 
provided by a single Jakan Arms 222 anti-vehicle 
emplacement. Two “Deathhawk” airspeeders are 
always on station, on the ground ready for a quick 
take-off. 


m Jakan Arms 222 Anti-Vehicle Blaster 
Model: Jakan Arms 222 Blaster Cannon 
Type: Medium Anti-Vehicle Laser Cannon 
Scale: Speeder 
Skill: Blaster artillery: anti-vehicle 
Crew: 4, skeleton: 2/+10 
Cover: Full 
Ammo: Unlimited (fed directly from power generator) 
Cost: 12,500 (new), 7,500 (used) 
Availability: 2, R or X 
Body: 2D+2 
Fire Rate: 1/2 
Fire Control: 2D 


fm A Lenba 


m Facts at a Glance 
Total Population: 11,300,000 (approximate) 
Species Breakdown: Gorothite: 99+%, Human and Other: 
<1% 


Overview 


A’Lenba, too, is located on a high plateau 
surrounded by rugged mountains. Unlike Graith, 
however, it is not sheltered by a rift valley. Thus 
there are fewer cliff dwellings — although there 
are some built into low hills that overlook the 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Range: 100-750/3/12 km 
Damage: 3D+1 


15. Military Barracks 


This heavily-reinforced pressure complex 
houses the military personnel stationed in Graith, 
Occupancy varies, but at any given time there will 
probably be 750 or so Imperial Army troopers and 
an equal number of Goroth Planetary Police—plus 
support personnel — in residence. The Goroth 
Planetary Police have their own quarters and facili- 
ties. 

Vehicular support is provided by six modified 
“Deathhawk” combat airspeeders, 12 Aratech 74-Z 
military speeder bikes, and two AT-AT walkers. 


m Barresin “Deathhawk” Combat 
Airspeeder 
Craft: Barresin “Deathhawk” Combat Airspeeder 
Type: Modified combat airspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 12 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operations: airspeeder (unskilled: -2D) 
Crew: 2 (1 can combine) 
Crew Skill: Repulsorlift operation: airspeeder 4D, vehicle 
blasters 4D+1 
Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-250 meters 
Cost: Not for sale 
Maneuverability: 2D+2 
Move: 350; 1,000 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D 
Weapons: 
Double Laser Cannon (fire-linked) 

Fire Arc: Front 

Crew: | (co-pilot) 

Skill: Vehicle blasters 

Fire Control: 3D 

Range: 50-300/800/1.5 km 

Damage: 5D+1 


16. Filter Complex 


A central filter facility handles the water supply 
for the pressure complexes. Each pressure has its 
own secondary filters as well (in case the central 
facility is compromised).A detachment of 10Goroth 
Planetary Police, supported by a dozen or so Impe- 
rial Army troopers, guard this facility round the 
clock. 


main enclave — and proportionately more sub- 
terranean “neighborhoods.” 

Like Graith, A’Lenba has a major source of 
relatively clean water — a lake known as B'Nal 
(“The Promise”) fed by vigorous streams that 
flow north from the nearby mountains. From 
B’Nal, a broad river flows northwest. 


1. Starport 


Smaller than the main port facility near Graith, 
this is set up in much the same way. There is a 


large military area, with a relatively tiny civilian 
and commercial zone. Security is much the same, 
although there are thought to be only three or 
four K7 “Black Dagger” security droids. The cen- 
tral control tower and the navigation beacons 
are under military control. 

There are fewer vessels on the ground at 
A’Lenba; only two four-ship flights of TIE/In fight- 
ers are present at any given time (unless more 
arrive escorting a major military vessel, of 
course). 7ribune-class shuttles arrive rarely, but 
there is still usually one or two small transports 
either on the ground or in transit. Civilian trans- 
ports not directly owned and operated by 
megacorporations are rare at A’Lenba, but not 
unheard-of. 

Customs procedures are similar to Graith’s, 
although some visitors have claimed that the 
personnel who conduct them are slightly less 
efficient than their colleagues from the capital. 
Some might be amenable to a little “redistribu- 
tion of wealth” under the right circumstances, 
but this is far from certain and nota matter where 
failure should be taken lightly. 


2. Lake B'Nal 


B’Nal (“The Promise”) is small, but cleaner 
and purer than V'Bren Goh in Graith. 


3. Gorothite Cliff Dwellings 


These complexes are much less elaborate than 
those in Graith. Only natives of high status live in 
these desirable residences. 


4. Gorothite Subterranean Dwellings 


These are more extensive than those in Graith. 
They are dug deeper into the bedrock, so the 
“neighborhoods” extend down further. Gener- 
ally speaking, neighborhoods hereare interlinked 
more than those in Graith. Tunnels are usually 
narrower and lower; to non-Gorothites, they are 
very claustrophobic. 


5. P’Dar'lb Hall 


Again, the Imperial representative — the Re- 
gional Prefect, a Human by the name of Del 
Obarren — has decided that the P’Dar'lb (the 
local council) is better separated from the re- 
mainder of the Gorothite population. The build- 
ing is constructed on the surface, totally counter 
to native ideas of architecture. It is an unpleas- 
ant, spartan place, and most members of the 
P’Dar’lb consider their stay here as roughly on 
par with a jail term. 


6. Regional Prefect’s Pressure 


Comfortable but far from sumptuous, this pres- 
sure houses Del Obarren, the Regional Prefect, 
and his staff. Security is provided by a detach- 
ment of 12 Goroth Planetary Police. Obarren 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements D By Woes 


ARS 


does not go to anywhere near the same lengths 
as the Colonial Governor to pretend that he is no 
more than an “advisor” to the native govern- 
ment. Native Gorothites are never allowed inside 
this pressure, and corporate representatives — 
those with impeccable credentials, anyway — 
are occasionally allowed to visit, but are never 
welcome. Off-worlders not directly associated 
with the Empire or the corporations are barred 
from this complex under all but the most unusual 
of circumstances. 


m Del Obarren, Regional Prefect 
Type: Cynical Imperial Functionary 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Dodge 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Alien species 3D+2, bureaucracy 4D, business 3D+2, will- 
power 4D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Command 3D, investigation 3D 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Security 2D+2 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink 
Capsule: Many people describe Del Obarren as 
“cruel,” but this is not quite accurate: true cruelty 
involves a level of emotion that seems well beyond 
the capacity of the Regional Prefect. He is cold, 
hard, and utterly pragmatic, unswayed by guilt or 
any sense of ethics or morality. He is exceptionally 
good at what he does, however, and has his eye on 
the post of Colonial Governor, butis patient enough 
to wait for this prize. 


7. Primary Rights-Holders Complex 


In this smaller o’beki, both TaggeCo and Karflo 
share a single pressure complex. Total occu- 
pancy is under 1,000. Predictably, no native 
Gorothites are ever allowed into this facility. 
Something of a power-play is underway between 
the corporate representatives and the Regional 
Prefect; currently, Imperial personnel are not 
welcome on the premises. That is fine with 
Obarren — for the moment — but Obarren vows 
that things will definitely change in the future. 

Security is provided by Karflo security per- 
sonnel. There is also a detachment of two dozen 
Imperial Army troopers near the site — but not 
too near — purportedly to provide “additional 
security,” but actually to keep an eye on corpo- 
rate activities and to remind the corporations 
that the Empire is still intensely interested in 
them. 


8. Secondary Rights-Holders Complex 


As in Graith, Trigdale Metallurgy and Vaufthau 
Processing Industries share a complex. These 
two corporations are making their own move in 
the power-play, trying to woo the Regional Pre- 
fect. Obarren and his close colleagues are frequent 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


S AR Chapter Seven: Major Settlements 
-WARS So nn 


© 
A 
- 
g 
= 
< 


73 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


guests at this pressure, enjoying the fine pan- 
Galactic cuisine of the executive dining rooms. 
Security is provided by Imperial Army troopers, 


9. Subsidiary Corporate Complex 


Much smaller and more spartan than the equiva- 
lent facility in Graith, this is shared by the subsid- 
iary rights-holders. Primary security is provided 
by Imperial Army troopers but there is also a small 
detachment of Karflo security personnel on duty 
around the clock, just in case the power-play by 
TaggeCo and Karflo has unwanted repercussions 
for other corps. 


10. Civilian Pressure 


There is one “transients’ residence,” a couple of 
limited-service restaurants, one packaged-office 
facility, and a single tavern within this pressure. 
Although these businesses are run by the corpora- 
tions — with native Gorothites performing all me- 
nial tasks, of course — there is a large Imperial 
presence. Imperial Army troopers are a common 
sight in the halls, and even in the tavern. 

As with the civilian pressures in other o’beki, 
many native Gorothites run small businesses here. 
There is a thriving bazaar in the central concourse, 
where Gorothites sell craft goods, miscellaneous 
personal equipment (styluses, simple datapads, 
and similar items), and other cheap items from 
barrows and stands. For obvious reasons, there is 
little trade in foodstuffs with off-worlders. 

Officially, all stalls and barrows must charge a 
sales tax. Most do when security personnel are 
watching. However, monitoring so many indepen- 
dent businesspeople — each barrow or stall is 


Chapter Seven: Major Settlements «== WA tes 


ARS 


almost invariably an independent concern — is 
simply too much work for the government bureau- 
crats. Predictably, restricted goods are not sold in 
the bazaars. However, the stalls and barrows are 
good places to make contacts, and arrange for 
meetings and transactions to take place elsewhere. 


11. Military Barracks 


As heavily-fortified as the equivalent facility in 
Graith, this complex is home to 500 or so Imperial 
Army troopers and perhaps 200 Goroth Planetary 
Police — again, plus support personnel. Occu- 
pancy varies depending on activity. When the 
Colonial Governor visits — a rare occasion — the 
number of troops present almost doubles. Vehicu- 
lar support is provided by four modified 
“Deathhawk” combat airspeeders, eight Aratech 
74-Z speeder bikes, and two AT-ST walkers. 


12. Filter Complex 


The central filter facility handles the water sup- 
ply for the pressure complexes. Each pressure has 
its own secondary filters as well, of course. A 
detachment of 10 Goroth Planetary Police, sup- 
ported by an equal number of Imperial Army troop- 
ers, guard this facility round the clock. 


13. Power Generator 


The setup here — including the separate cir- 
cuits for pressure complexes and Gorothite resi- 
dences — is the same as in Graith. Similar, too, is 
the security detachment: 25 Goroth Planetary Po- 
lice, supported by the same heavy weapons. One 
“Deathhawk” airspeeder is always on station, 
ready for a quick lift-off. 


EE Typical Hyperbaride 
Extraction/Cracking 


Facility 


Individual facilities vary quite widely, depend- 
ing on their exact functions, and on the nature of 
their environment — specifically, the topogra- 
phy, and the proximity to the surface of rich 
hyperbaride deposits. Following is information 
on a “typical” facility. The exact details refer to 
the facility northeast of the crater in Yar’En, in 
the eastern hemisphere; other facilities are more 
or less similar, however. 


m Facts at a Glance 
Total Personnel Complement: 7,500 
“Client-Workers”: 6,150 


Corporate Personnel: 850 
Military Personnel: 500 


1. “Client-Worker” Barracks 

Each of the three barracks complexes can 
accommodate 2,500 client-workers. The vast 
majority are native Gorothites, of course, al- 
though sometimes client-workers of other spe- 
cies are assigned to these facilities. Spartan in 
the extreme, the level of crowding and the poor 
quality of support facilities makes these places 
more unpleasant and soul-destroying than some 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


d ee eee Chapter Seven: Major Settlements 


-WA 


Imperial slave camps. Air and water supplies are 
filtered because the environment hereis so harsh 
that it will eventually kill even native Gorothites. 

Work goes on around the clock at all Imperial 
facilities, workers operate on a 12-hour-on-24- 
hour-off regimen: three shifts per day. When off- 
shift, most workers stay in their bunks, trying to 
regain their strength for the next grueling day. 
There are no entertainment facilities beyond a 
single datapad for every 200 or so workers; it is 
linked to a small library of files. There are no 
exercise facilities. 

The quality of health-care has improved of 
late, as the corporations and the Empire have 
come to realize that sick or dead workers are not 
overly productive. Each barracks has a small, 
understaffed and under-equipped clinic. 
“Goldbricking” is strongly discouraged, predict- 
ably; as soon as it has been determined that a 
patient is not going to die in the immediate 
future, he or she is returned to the duty roster. 

Security is exceptionally harsh. The Empire 
recognizes that over 6,000 disgruntled workers 
represent a very real security risk. It handles the 
problem by breaking the spirit of the workers 
early on, and keeping it broken. Imperial Army 
troopers and even Goroth Planetary Police pa- 
trol the barracks complexes around the clock, 
even going so far as to “roust” workers occasion- 
ally during their sleep periods. Even the most 
minor break in discipline leads to a complete 
“lock-down”: off-duty workers are confined to 
their bunks, under the blasters of armed guards. 

Except for J’Nes B’Sar (“Truth Gatherings”), 
organized meetings of Gorothites are prohibited. 
Even talking to bunk-mates is discouraged. All 
sleeping and eating quarters are wired, and secu- 
rity personnel monitor the bugs on an irregular 
schedule. Client-workers can never be sure that 
their casual conversations are not being over- 
heard. 


2. Military Barracks 


Although spartan by any other standards, the 
facilities for military personnel are orders of 
magnitudemorecomfortableand hospitable than 
those for client-workers. Military personnel work 
the same three-shift regimen as the client-work- 
ers (although they get several breaks during 
each shift). They are provided with elaborate 
entertainment and exercise facilities to keep them 
(more or less) happy while off-duty. A typical 
complement comprises 350 Imperial Army troop- 
ers, each equipped with his own envirosuit, plus 
150 Goroth Planetary Police. 

These personnel are responsible for both the 
control of the client-workers and the protection 
of the facility from hostile actions. To this end, 
they are equipped with E-Web repeating blasters 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


and other heavy weapons. Four gun emplace- 
ments atop the facility itself each contain a single 
Jakan Arms 222 anti-vehicle blaster cannon. 

Attached to this complex are the storage and 
repair facilities for the vehicles necessary to 
defend the site. A typical vehicle complement 
includes four “Deathhawk” airspeeders, eight 
Mekuun Repulsor Scouts, and 12 Aratech 74-Z 
speeder bikes. Supplies are ferried in by modi- 
fied Ubrikkian SuperHaul cargo skiffs, and the 
hyperbaride products are shipped out via the 
sameroute. There are usually one ortwoskiffs on 
the ground at any given time. 

If the Empire believes a site to be at particular 
risk, the Naval presence in orbit will ship addi- 
tional forces and vehicles in for support. Troop 
population will temporarily double, and there 
will be at least two AT-AT walkers on-site. 


m Mekuun Repulsor Scout 
Craft: Mekuun Repulsor Scout 
Type: Modified landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 8 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1, gunners: 1 
Crew Skill: Varies, but often repulsorlift operation 3D, 
vehicle blasters 3D+2 
Passengers: 2 
Cargo Capacity: 100 kilograms 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 
Cost: 12,000 (new) 
Maneuverability: 1D+1 
Move: 105; 300 kmh 
Body Strength: 3D 
Weapons: 
1 Heavy Repeating Blaster 

Fire Arc: Turret 

Crew: 1 

Skill: Vehicle blasters 

Fire Control: 0D 

Range: 3-75/200/500 

Damage: 4D 


3. Corporate Personnel Facilities 


This pressure is home to the corporate per- 
sonnel responsible for managing and operating 
the plant. The facilities here are even better than 
those for the military personnel, but they still 
certainly fall short of what many of the corporate 
employees are used to. 


4. Cooling Pools 


These pools of water are vital to the operation 
of the plant. Intake pipes draw (relatively) cool 
water into the facility, and matched outflow pipes 
return the water — and the waste heat it has 
picked up — to the pool. The pools are fed by 
underground streams so there is always a rela- 
tively fresh supply of water. 


5. Main Plant Building 
This is a harsh and ugly structure, its sheer 


NN T AR Chapter Seven: Major Settlements 
-WA 


walls rising almost 75 meters into the overcast 
sky. The machinery inside roars and hums every 
hour of the day. Vibrations can be felt through 
the ground for kilometers, and the volume level 
is above the threshold of pain within 100 meters 
of the site. Characters without suitable ear pro- 
tection will suffer a +1D penalty to all difficulty 
numbers due to pain and disorientation. 


6. Cooling Stacks 


Like the cooling towers associated with old- 
style nuclear plants, these gout steam into the air 
as they pour waste heat into the environment. 
They rise 25 meters above the flat roof of the 
plant. 


7. Exhaust Tower 


While the cooling stacks give off nothing but 
(relatively) clean steam, this huge tower — an 
additional 100 meters tall — gouts forth black, 
billowing clouds filled with an evil brew of toxins: 
the waste products of the extraction and crack- 
ing process. Secondary reactions within this cloud 
burn with a dull, ruddy “deathlight” (“b’lenjor” in 
the Gorothite tongue). Static charge is high, and 
lightning often strikes from this cloud, hitting the 
lightning rods that top the exhaust tower and the 
cooling stacks. 

Details on a hyperbaride plant built along 
roughly similar lines can be found in the Star 
Wars adventure, Planet of the Mists. 


Mike Vilardi 


EE Even Gorothites must don full environment suits for working in 
the most polluted areas of Goroth. 


RR RR RRR i RR RF 
Goroth: Slave of the Empire 77 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


AR=— 
ARS 


a Chapter Eight 


New Technology 


The conditions on Goroth decrease the effec- 
tiveness of standard technology, or make new 
demands onit that it was not designed to counter. 
All the major factions, therefore, have had to 
develop new technologies — or, at least, to ring 
some significant changes on old technologies — 
to meet the challenges of the planet. 


Vehicles 


Repulsorlift technology is exceptionally un- 
stable on Goroth because of the high radiation 
flux. Modifications can be made — as described 
earlier — but they are expensive. Pilots without 
experience with these vehicles suffer substantial 
penalties. As well as modifying old vehicles, the 
Empire and the corporations have developed 
new vehicles to meet the requirements of Goroth. 
Most of these vehicles are powered by batteries, 
regularly recharged with energy from geother- 
mal plants. Some, however, actually burn high- 
energy carbon compounds for power. 

Following are the details on some of these new 
vehicles. This list is not exhaustive, however, 
and gamemasters should feel free to introduce 
new vehicles that match the “flavor” of their 
campaigns. 


Ownership/Operation Restrictions 


Allarmed and armored vehicles on Goroth are 
limited to military use. Possession or operation 
of (or even coming too close to, under certain 
circumstances) such a vehicle is grounds for 
incarceration or worse. Vehicles under these 
restrictions are marked “Military” in the sections 
that follow. 

Other vehicles can only be purchased by au- 
thorized employees of megacorporations that 
own exploitation rights on Goroth (in other words, 
other visitors and native Gorothites cannot own 
them). These vehicles are marked “Restricted” in 
the sections that follow. 


Hover Vehicles 


Generally known as “hovers,” these vehicles 
ride on a cushion of air created by lift engines, 
contained by a flexible “skirt.” They are generally 
not fast, and almost never very maneuverable, 
but they can handle almost as wide a variety of 
terrains — including water — as standard 
repulsorlift-driven landspeeders. 


m VJar be’ Mun K’Raith (“Windstorm”) 


Hover Vehicle 

Craft: V'Jar Technologies K'Raith Hover Vehicle 
Type: Light hover vehicle 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 6 meters 

Skill: Hover vehicle operation: K'Raith 
Crew: 2 (1 can combine) 

Crew Skill: Varies widely 

Passengers: 8 

Cargo Capacity: 600 kilograms 

Cover: 1/2 

Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 
Cost: 17,000 (new) 

Move: 28; 80 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D+1 (around skirt), 2D 


Capsule: During the reconstruction, before the ar- 
rival of the Empire, j’ber V'Jar was already turning 
out the hover vehicles that would become the 
primary vehicle used by native Gorothites. V'Jar 
Technologies has since been nationalized, of course 
— after all, transportation is a strategic industry 
and thus must be “rationalized and monitored” — 
but its products, including the K’Raith, are still the 
only vehicles that can be purchased by native 
Gorothites. 

The vehicle is small and simple. The skirt is 
made of light, flexible polynoreltin, and is the most 
vulnerable part of the vehicle. A ruptured skirt will 
totally immobilize the vehicle. Sometimes this bed 
is covered with a synthsilk tarpaulin. 


m Aratech 93-B Light Hover 
Craft: Aratech 93-B Light Hover 
Type: Light hover vehicle 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 9 meters 
Skill: Hover vehicle operation: 93-B 
Crew: 2 (1 can combine) 

Crew Skill: Varies widely 
Passengers: 7 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


wat SIA CRA N = 


YN PAm Eae 
: ; = ERE : 


‘Let 
I 


TAN = Pag i 
le 4j [IE #” 
A 9 ESN sts 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 79 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


Cargo Capacity: 2 metric tons 

Cover: Full 

Altitude Range: Ground level—1 meter 

Cost: 25,000 credits (Restricted) 

Maneuverability: 1D+2 

Move: 42; 120 kmh 

Body Strength: 2D 

Capsule: This is the hover vehicle most frequently 
used by the megacorporations and the Empire for 
light hauling and personnel transport. It features an 
enclosed and pressurized command and passenger 
compartment (independently sealed, so breaching 
one will not compromise the other). The skirt is 
reinforced with thin plates of duralumin, making it 
more resistant to tearing (and, incidentally, to 
weapon fire). Theoretically, a weapon could be 
mounted, but there are no through-hulls for wiring 
and installation could well compromise the integ- 
rity of the pressurized compartments. 


m Aratech 101-C Medium Military Hover 


Craft: Aratech 101-C Medium Military Hover 
Type: Medium hover vehicle 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 9 meters 

Skill: Hover vehicle operation: 101-C Military 
Crew: 2 (1 can combine), gunners: 1 

Crew Skill: Vehicle blasters 4D+1, hover vehicle opera- 
tion 3D+2 

Passengers: 8 

Cargo Capacity: 1 metric ton 

Cover: Full 

Altitude Range: Ground level-] meter 

Cost: 45,000 credits (Military) 
Maneuverability: 1D 

Move: 60; 180 kmh 

Body Strength: 3D 

Weapons: 


ARST 


Crew: 2 (1 can combine) 
Passengers: 12 
Cargo Capacity: 4 metric tons 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 
Cost: 47,000 credits (Military) 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Move: 42; 120 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D+2 
Weapons: 
Laser Cannon 
Fire Arc: Front 
Crew: 1 (co-pilot) 
Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Range: 3-50/100/200 
Damage: 4D 


Capsule: The latest addition to the Aratech hover 
line, the 109-Z definitely shows its heritage. To a 
purist, its lines are less refined and more brutal 
than its smaller fellows; but to the tyro, it looks 
much like a bigger, bulkier version of the 101-C 
inexplicably missing its turret. Its single front- 
mounted laser cannon looks like an afterthought, a 
(distressingly accurate) impression that is only 
enhanced when one looks at the schematics. Added 
only because the Empire would not buy an armored 
cargo transport without any weapons, the laser 
cannon is next to useless in a scrap since a trans- 
port would most likely be running from trouble 
anyway, making its front fire arc useless. If used in 
harm's way, the 109-Z is always escorted by more 
combat-capable vehicles: 101-Cs, perhaps, or modi- 
fied landspeeders. 


Repulsorlift Vehicles 
Several modified repulsorlifts have already 


Double Blaster Cannon (fire-linked) 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control; 1D (can be used by co-pilot at fire 


been described. Following are three task-specific 
repulsorlift craft built specifically for the Goroth 
environment. 


m Ikas-Adno Fleetwing Landspeeder 


control 0D) Craft: Ikas-Adno Fleetwing Landspeeder 
Range: 50-250/500/900 Type: Utility speeder j 
Damage: 4D Scale: Speeder 

Capsule: At first glance, the 101-C Medium Hover is Length: 4 meters 

identical to the 93-B Light Hover except for the ee operation: landspeeder 


addition of a servo-controlled turret mounted atop 
the passenger compartment. Internally, however, 
the differences are significant. The engines — both 
the liftand drive systems —are considerably beefed 
up (unfortunately, at the cost of some maneuver- 
ability). Additional armor has been added allaround, 
including heavy plates of duralumin to protect the 
skirt. Normally the blaster cannons in the turret are 
fired by a gunner in the passenger compartment. In 
a pinch, however, the fire control system can be 
slaved to the co-pilot’s controls. While operating 
the weapon, the co-pilot cannot combine with the 
pilot to drive the vehicle. 


m Aratech 109-Z Armored Cargo Hover 


Craft: Aratech 109-Z Armored Cargo Hover 
Type: Heavy hover vehicle 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 12 meters 

Skill: Hover vehicle operation: 109-Z 


Crew Skill: Varies widely 

Passengers: 4 

Cargo Capacity: 60 kilograms 

Cover: 1/2 

Altitude Range: Ground level-1.5 meters 

Cost: 15,000 credits (Restricted) 

Maneuverability: 2D 

Move: 70; 200 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D+2 

Capsule: A light utility landspeeder, this resembles 
a four-seater version of the familiar Ubrikkian 9000 
Z004 (in fact, Ikas-Adno is currently being sued by 
Ubrikkian for stealing the Z004’s design). Unfortu- 
nately, Ikas-Adno seems not to have stolen 
Ubrikkian’s counter-balancers; the ride on the 
Fleetwing is hard on the kidneys. Less adventurous 
corporate employees hate riding in Fleetwings be- 
cause thecraft is open and they must don envirosuits 
before going for a ride. 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—STA 
-WA 


ee 


yr - 
mF es 


er eee 7 


ie et 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


TET 


=> 
Ly 2 


EE Minas-Lergo PM-3B passenger car (top) and PM-7C cargo car (bottom). 


m Mobquet Shark Airspeeder 
Craft: Mobquet Shark Airspeeder 
Type: Combat Airspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 5 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: airspeeder 
Crew: 1, gunners: | 
Crew Skill: Varies widely 
Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-300 meters 
Cost: 62,000 credits (Military) 
Maneuverability: +1 
Move: 350; 1,000 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D-2 
Weapons: 

Double Laser Cannon (fire-linked) 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control: 1D+2 
Range: 50-100/150/200 
Damage: 5D+1 


Capsule: Only recently coming into service, the 
Shark is an ugly, ungainly-looking craft that — so 
pilots claim — handles like a crippled bantha. This 
is partially because the ugly, wart-like turret 
mounted behind the crew compartment was retro- 
fitted from a Mobquet prototype — the P-34 — 
merely to meet the Empire’s Request for Proposal. 
(The P-34, it may be remembered, was never brought 
to market because of its own handling problems). 
Still, the twin laser cannons pack a serious punch, 
despite their relatively limited range. 


So far, there are thought to be only a dozen or so 
evaluation units on Goroth Prime. If the evaluation 
works out, however — and Mobquet has several 
executives on-planet to make sure it does — the 
Shark will probably become popular for Imperial 
operations. 


m Trask Industries 008 Heavy 


Landspeeder 
Craft: Trask Industries 008 Heavy Landspeeder 
Type: Combat Landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 8 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1, gunners: 1 
Crew Skill: Varies widely 
Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 
Cover: Full 
Altitude Range: Ground level-3 meters 
Cost: 23,000 credits (Military) 
Maneuverability: 3D 
Move: 110; 315 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D+1 
Weapons: 
Double Laser Cannon (firelinked) 
Fire Arc: Front 
Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control: 3D 
Range: 50-300/700/1.1 km 
Damage: 4D 
Two Medium Blasters (fire-linked) 
Fire Arc: Back 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 50-300/450/850 
Damage: 6D 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


81 


Dan & David Day 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


Capsule: Again, the first evaluation units of the 008 
are only newly-arrived on Goroth Prime, but al- 
ready Imperial light infantry pilots are crowing 
about their new toy. Heavy and brutal-looking, the 
008 is surprisingly quick for a landspeeder and it 
handles like a pilot’s dream. The 008 was designed 
around its weapon systems. The fire control on the 
front lasers — which are operated by the pilot —is 
very sophisticated indeed. Imperial procurement 
officers are trying to convince Trask Industries to 
retrofit the same microtronics into the rear me- 
dium blasters. If there is one fly in the ointment, it 
is occasional reports that when all weapons fire 
simultaneously, the vehicle momentarily becomes 
unstable (possibly due to power draw-down in the 
lateral stabilizers). 


Rotorcraft 


m VJar be’ Mun De’ B’Den ("Silver 


Falcon”) Rotorcraft 

Craft: V'Jar Technologies Silver Falcon 

Type: Medium rotorcraft 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 12 meters 

Skill: Rotor vehicle operation: De’ B'Den (Unskilled: -3D) 
Crew: 2 (1 can combine), skeleton: 1/+15 

Crew Skill: Rotor vehicle operation 3D+1 


ARS™ 


Move: 175; 500 kmh 

Body Strength: 1D+2 

Capsule: V'Jar Industries once had a full range of 
vehicles adapted to the realities of Goroth’s envi- 
ronment: hover vehicles and rotorcraft. After na- 
tionalization, however, the product line was sub- 
stantially trimmed. Today, only the Silver Falcon 
rotorcraft and the Windstorm are still being ac- 
tively produced. 

The Silver Falcon is a bare-bones rotorcraft. Its 
bodyis astreamlined tear-drop shape, witha ducted 
tail rotor incorporated into the fuselage. Its six- 
blade, high-speed rotor looks dangerously small to 
rotorcraft pilots from other worlds. In fact, the 
design choice made by V’Jar engineers — to mini- 
mize blade length, and compensate for lost lift by 
increasing rotation speed — was made for safety. 
Short-blade rotors make the craft more stable in the 
unpredictable winds over the mountains. 

Silver Falcons are too expensive for the majority 
of Gorothites to even consider ever owning one. 
Native businesses still sometimes buy them, and 
some of the corporations have recently acquired a 
couple. 


Weapons 
Before the coming of the Empire, the native 


Passengers: 6 : 3 
Cargo Capacity: 2 metric tons Gorothites had developed an entire range of 
Cover: Full weapons to help them cope with the carnivores 


Altitude Range: Ground level-8,000 meters 


Cost: 40,000 credits that preyed on them during the first centuries 


after the Scouring. None of these weapons were 


Dan & David Day 


—— 


ENAN 
=N 


Maneuverability: 1D 


Sman 


EE K7 Security Droid. 


poer 
aaa 


82 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


i AR‘ Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


-WA 


based on standard blaster technology; even be- 
fore the asteroid impacts, the Gorothites had 
never been really enamored with this technol- 
ogy. After the Scouring, they had lost the ability 
to replicate blaster technology even if they had 
wanted to. 

One family, j'ber Jer'N, emerged as the pre- 
miere weaponsmiths during the Recovery, offer- 
ing a full range of slug-throwers, “lightning guns” 
and microwave stunners. With the arrival of the 
Empire, j'ber Jer’'N's good times came to an end. 
Production and ownership of ranged weapons 
was outlawed for native Gorothites, punishable 
by incarceration or even death, depending on the 
circumstances. Jer'N’s operations were national- 
ized and then closed down. The Empire then 
tried to disarm the native population by an- 
nouncing a two-week “amnesty” during which 
Gorothites owning weapons could turn them in 
tothe Colonial Government for destruction, with- 
out any legal consequences. After that amnesty 
period was over, harsh penalties would be ap- 
plied to anyone possessing a forbidden weapon. 

Many Gorothites turned over their weapons 
during this amnesty. Some, however, kept theirs, 
hiding them from the Imperial “safety and secu- 
rity sweeps" which regularly passed through the 
cliff dwellings and subterranean neighborhoods. 
Today, although there are no new weapons being 
made on Goroth Prime, there are stockpiles of 
old models hidden away, and a vigorous — but 
extremely cautious— black market in proscribed 
devices. 


w Jer’'N be’ Milad Vel “Hammer” 
Model: Jer'N Weapons Systems Hammer 
Type: Medium slug-thrower 
Scale: Character * 
Skill: Firearms: pistol 
Ammo: 8 
Cost: 250 (ammo: 1 slug: 1) 
Availability: 3, X 
Ranges: 2-8/20/40 
Damage: 4D-+1 
Game Notes: The Hammer's extreme recoil requires the 
user to make a Moderate Strength roll after the weapon is 
fired. If the roll fails, additional shots in that round or in 
the next round are at an additional -1D penalty; if the 
character waits a full round before firing again, there is no 
penalty, If the character succeeds at the Strength roll, 
there Is no penalty beyond the normal multiple action 
penalties, 


Capsule: The Jer'N Hammer is a brutal-looking — 
and brutally effective at short ranges — chemical 
slug-thrower. Its design is unmistakable because of 
the spring-loaded magazine that protrudes from 
the top of the frame. It is asemi-automatic weapon, 
based on a blowback design. Recoil is absolutely 
brutal — particularly to people used to blasters — 
and the noise is punishing in the extreme. Still, the 
large bullet packs a serious wallop. Although not 
specifically designed for this purpose, the caseless 
rounds act as armor-piercing bullets. 


m Jer'N be’ Milad Vel “Lightning Gun” 
Model: Jer'N Weapons Systems Lightning Gun 
Type: Specialized energy weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: blaster carbine 
Ammo: 6 
Cost: 875 (power packs: 35) 
Availability: 3, X 
Ranges: 3-25/50/75 
Damage: 5D+2 
Capsule: The only lethal energy weapon produced 
by Jer'N be’ Milad Vel, the lightning gun uses an 
innovative technology. The weapon fires discrete 
“packets” of charged sub-atomic particles — two 
packets, in fact, one comprising positively-charged 
particles, the other negatively-charged antiparticles. 
They are kept apart — until they strike their target, 
at least — by “shepherd” packets of coherent light 
energy. On striking a target, the shepherd packets 
break down, and the particles and antiparticles 
annihilate each other, delivering a lethal energy 
“blast.” 

In appearance, a lightning gun blast resembles 
an elongated blaster bolt, except that it is a distinc- 
tive actinic blue-white in color. The sound, too, is 
distinctive: a ripping crack similar to a crack of 
thunder. Lightning guns cannot be set on stun. 


mi Jer'N be’ Milad Vel Microwave Stunner 
Model: Jer'N Weapons Systems Microwave Stunner 
Type: Specialized energy weapon 
Scale; Character 
Skill: Blaster: hold-out blaster 
Ammo: 10 
Cost: 175 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 3, X 

Ranges: 3-5/10/20 

Damage: 4D (stun) 

Capsule: The microwave stunner looks much like a 
standard hold-out blaster, and has almost identical 
balance; anyone proficient with a hold-out blaster 
will be a good shot with the stunner as well. As its 
name implies, the Jer’N stunner fires a coherent 
bolt of microwave energy, tuned to interfere with 
the neural processes of a living creature. While 
there are probably some creatures in the galaxy 
whose neural anatomy makes them immune to this 
effect, none have yet visited Goroth. The weapon's 
beam is invisible, but it does make a distinctive 
“thrum” sound as loud as the report of a blaster. 
Because of the relatively weak output of the micro- 
wave blast, characters wearing armor (blast vest, 
blast helmets or better) may choose to use the 
armor's generally better “physical” protection to 
resist damage. 


Droids 


Droids arenowherenearas commononGoroth 
as they are on other Imperial worlds simply 
because the cost of modifying them to survive 
the radiation fluxis often prohibitive. Most droids 
found on Goroth are standard models, with addi- 
tional shielding “retrofitted” to protect them from 
the environment. Over the last year or so, how- 
ever, Karflo has started producing droids on- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


83 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


ee); | 


ARS 


Equipment Chart 
The following table lists some basic survival gear — the kind of thing that a cross-country 


traveler would be well-advised not to forget. 
Item 
Flares (12) : 
- Fusion Power Generator (light) 
Glow Rod 
Knife* 
Radiant Heater- 


Rations (one person, one week) 


Sleeping Bag 
Survival tent (one-person) 
Survival tent (two-person) 
_ Survival tent (six-person) 
Syntherope (50 meters) 
* With self-sharpening sheath 


planet designed specifically to resist the radia- 
tion flux. Although still much more expensive 
than standard droids, these models are signifi- 
cantly cheaper than the cost of retrofitting an 
existing droid. Of course, “cheaper” in this case 
is a relative term. Generally, it is still cheaper to 
use “client-workers.” The most popular of these 
droids — currently in service with most of the 
corporations operating on Goroth Prime—is the 
AR-2B utility droid. 


m Karflo Corporation AR-2B Utility Droid 
Type: Karflo AR-2B Utility Droid 
DEXTERITY 1D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Lifting 3D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Equipped With: 
+ Humanoid body (two arms, two legs, head) 
* Two visual and two audial sensors — Human range 
+ Vocabulator speech system 
e C3-DD NeuroNet brain 
Move: 7 
Size: 1.7 meters tall 
Cost: 2,250 


Capsule: Classed as a fifth-degree droid, the AR-2B 
is designed specifically for menial labor, in the 
home, the office, or the industrial site. It can under- 
stand instructions given to it in Basic, but it has the 
disturbing tendency to be exceptionally literal- 
minded. (Sarcastically telling an AR-2B to “take off” 
might well result in it hurling itself from the roof.) 

The droid’s rudimentary vocabulator allows it 
to speak Basic, but its voice is harsh and buzzing 
and obviously synthetic. The unit has a vocabulary 
of only 300 words. 

The C3-DD NeuroNet brain is a functional unit, 
but it is totally incapable of abstract thought or 


Availability 


Cost 
=== 


1 
1 
1 
l 
1 
1 
l 
1 
1 
1 


higher reasoning. AR-2Bs are incapable of under- 
standing hypothetical situations, reacting to them 
as though they were the literal truth. 


Survival Gear 


Clothing 


Malik Technologies A-5 Envirosuit 


The most popular of the eight or nine envirosuit 
models in common use on Goroth, the Malik A-5 
is an expensive product but well worth the price. 
It provides a full, sealed environment for the 
wearer, protecting him from radiation and ex- 
tremes of temperature, and shielding him from 
environmental contaminants. A sophisticated 
“scrubber/rebreather” in the backpack cleans 
and recycles air. This extends the life of the suit’s 
air supply to six standard hours. Heating and 
cooling systems maintain a wearer-selected in- 
ternal temperature regardless of ambient tem- 
perature and incident radiation. The suit is war- 
ranted to handle temperature ranges of -60 de- 
grees Celsius to 150 degrees Celsius. 

Batteries in the backpack have a maximum life 
of 10 hours, which drops to four hours in extreme 
temperatures (when the conditioning system is 
working full blast, i.e., below-35 degrees or above 
60 degrees). The outer shell is reflectant and 
fireproof. 

The suit comes in three main parts. The 
bodysuit is light and flexible, similar in appear- 
ance to a space suit except without the anti- 
meteoroid reinforcement plates. The helmet is a 
transparent dome, giving full 360° vision. A mini- 
spotlight is mounted on top of the helmet. Fi- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


Been 
an = rrr TE we = 
ari uE S 


WUREETS/// WAALS 


m P —__ 

a 

Wn d iti 
B | | a 1 


Mog il Wes 


UJ sere 


= 
-e 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 85 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 


nally, comes the backpack —at 10 kilograms, the 
heaviest part of the suit. 

The A-5 provides limited armor protection: +2 
against physical attacks, +1 against energy at- 
tacks. The helmet provides +1 against physical 
attacks and no protection against energy attacks. 


w Malik Technologies A-5 Envirosuit 
Model: Malik Technologies A-5 Envirosuit 
Type: Survival suit 
Cost: 1,000 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: 
Basic Suit: Provides +2 to all physical attacks; +1 to all 
energy attacks for torso, arms, and legs. Provides +1 to all 
physical attacks for head (no protection from energy 
attacks). -1D penalty to all Dexterity attribute and skill 
checks due to bulk. 


“Rock Boots” 


Reinforced footwear designed to resist the 
harsh surface of the volcanic badlands, rock 
boots come in different models for different spe- 

‘cies. Envirosuit manufacturers typically claim 
that the footwear of their suits are resistant 
enough to stand up to the badlands. Understand- 
ably, however, few people want to take a chance; 
it is common practice to wear a pair of rock boots 
over an envirosuit. 


m Rock Boots 
Model: Malik Industries Rock Boots 
Type: Survival boots 
Cost: 50-200 (depending on species) 
Availability: 2 


ns 


ARST 


Goroth Planetary Police 
Armor 


Goroth Planetary Police armor serves much 
the same purpose as stormtrooper armor, so 
functionally the two types of gear are similar. In 
appearance, however, they could hardly be more 
different. Although the Goroth Planetary Police 
armor shares the same 18-piece-cocoon para- 
digm, every facet of the design is more angular. 
There are no smooth, sweeping curves; instead, 
Goroth Planetary Police armor consists of flat 
planes and intersecting angles. 

Its color, too, is very different: blood-red in- 
stead of white. The gaps in stormtrooper armor 
are missing, replaced by flexible red gaskets. All 
in all, the suit looks more thoroughly sealed, with 
the appearance of greater protection over the 
vulnerable joints. 

The “backpack” built into the suit is also larger 
and heavier than the stormtrooper model. It 
contains an enhanced version of the “scrubber/ 
rebreather” technology used in envirosuits, ex- 
tending the life of the air supply to 10 hours. The 
heating/cooling unit keeps the wearer comfort- 
able in ambient temperatures ranging from -75 
degrees to 170 degrees Celsius. Advanced 
dylinium hydride power packs have a maximum 
life of 12 hours, dropping to eight in extreme 
temperature ranges. 

Goroth Planetary Police armor has an inte- 


= 
lpi 


pling i 


eae 
um S 


= 5 


EE Trask Industries 008 Heavy Landspeeder. 


Dan & David Day 


86 Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—ST, 


Chapter Eight: New Technolo 
Sparr a aaa a 


lll 


grated multi-band comlink, with a range of 2 
kilometers, plus enhanced targeting optics. 


w Goroth Planetary Police Armor 
Model: Goroth Planetary Police Armor 
Type: Specialized personal defense armor 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 3, X 
Game Notes: 
Basic Suit: +2D physical, +1D+1D energy to Strength to 
resist damage.-1D toall Dexterity attribute and skill checks. 
Comlink: Helmet contains tongue-toggled comlink for in- 
stant communication with other units. 
Targeting System: Contains a Multi-Frequency Targeting 
and Acquisition System (MFTAS) which gives +2D to all 
Perception checks in darkness, smoke and other visibility- 
obscuring conditions. Also gives +2D to ranged weapon 
skill uses (such as blaster) when the user aims for more 
than one round (in addition to the normal bonus for 
“preparing,” as described on page 65 of Second Edition). 
Emergency Survival Kit: Incorporated into backpack, in- 
cluding two additional dylinium hydride power packs. 
Dedicated Emergency Locator: 150 kilometer range. 


m Typical Goroth Planetary Police 


Trooper 

Type: Goroth Planetary Police Trooper 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 2D+1, blaster: blaster rifle 3D+2, blaster artillery 
3D, brawling parry 2D+2, dodge 3D+ 1, grenade 3D, vehicle 
blasters 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Survival 3D, survival: hyperbaride-contaminated environ- 
ment 4D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Hover vehicle operation 3D, repulsorlift operation 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 3D, stamina 3D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Goroth Planetary Police armor (+1D+1D en- 
ergy, +2D physical, -1D Dexterity and all related skills; see 
above for specifics), blaster rifle (SD), blaster pistol (4D), 
2 grenades (4D) 


Milli, 


| 


Ayi 


ills 


Hue teem 


Mills 


il 


7 


f 
Z 
p 
Yj 
Y 
p 
Y 
Yj 
p 
Y 
] 
. 
) 
p 
g 
p 
Y 


SG 


Mike Vilardi 


ee _______ 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


87 


Chapter Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness 


AR. 
ARS 


fe Chapter Nine 


Adventures in the 


Wilderness 


Leaving the O’bekis 


On most worlds, wild, uninhabited regions are 
“merely” dangerous: on Goroth, the wilderness 
can be deadly within a frighteningly short time. 
Any number of events can strand characters far 
from a Goroth o’beki, resulting in them having to 
use their utmost cunning to survive. 

When far from the protective pressures of 
Goroth, characters will have to contend with the 
poisonous air and water, massive lightning 
storms, incredible earthquakes, and, of course, 
the dangerous creatures of Goroth’s wilds. 

Gamemasters are encouraged to reinforce the 
characters’ sense of isolation and helplessness 
in this environment. It is assumed that some sort 
of vehicle or starship malfunction is the most 
likely event to leave charcters stranded in the 
wilderness; this event is also the one most likely 
to leave characters without adequate survival 
gear. Characters will not be able to comlink for 
assistance, so no one will know what fate has 
befallen them and no one is going to send help. 

Characters may be lucky enough to have wa- 
ter filtration systems and full survival suits in the 
vehicle, but it is unlikely that they will have more 
than two or three days worth of rations. 

Characters will be left with little choice but to 
travel overland towards the nearest known settle- 
ment. The gamemaster can easily build a true 
“wilderness” adventure, complete with massive 
lightning storms, erupting volcanoes and eerie 
night-time encounters with the nightdevils. 

Characters also have excellent opportunities 
to encounter previously unknown creatures, 
forgotton Gorothite enclaves (which may be hos- 
tile, or may take the characters in) or discover 
rich concentrations of hyperbaride deposits — 
information that TaggeCo or another corpora- 
tion would pay a fortune for. 


Living Off the Land 


All native Gorothite species incorporate trace 
elements (and contaminants) from their environ- 


ment into their bodies. When these life-forms are 
eaten as food, those trace elements are passed 
on to the creatures that ate them. With each step 
up the “food chain” or “food web” — from “au- 
totrophs” like plants and the equivalent, up to- 
ward secondary consumers like predatory carni- 
vores — many of these trace elements are con- 
centrated. 

Thus, while the tissue of a plant might contain 
only small concentrations ofacontaminant (such 
as hollinium chloride and other hyperbaride 
salts), predators at the top of the food chain 
might have much larger concentrations in their 
flesh. 

This is the situation on Goroth, At the bottom 
of the food web are primitive autotrophs similar 
to mosses (most more advanced forms of plant 
life became extinct soon after the Scouring). 
They photosynthesize (in other words, use the 
energy of the sun to synthesize complex carbo- 
hydrates such as sugars, starches and similar 
chemicals). These mosses — of which there are 
literally thousands of species — are the ultimate 
source of food energy for all other creatures on 
the planet. 

Gorothite mosses contain relatively small con- 
centrations of hyperbarides, which they absorb 
from the rocks on which they grow and from the 
water that hydrates them. The moss species that 
have survived are unaffected by these toxins, 
having built up an innate resistance over the 
centuries. The primary moss consumers — the 
herbivores (including the Gorothites) — are also 
immune to the levels of toxins in the mosses that 
they eat. (Otherwise, they would have become 
extinct, too!) 

Some of these “heterotrophs” — that is, crea- 
tures that live by devouring other creatures — 
are, in turn, eaten by still other heterotrophs: 
carnivores and scavengers. In some cases, the 
cycle turns one or more additional times as well: 
herbivores are eaten by carnivores, which in 
turn are eaten by larger carnivores. In all cases, 
the heterotrophs of Goroth are effectively im- 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


DN ns ter Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness 


-WA 


mune to the levels of toxins in the creatures on 
which they feed. 

Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of off- 
worlders. All life-forms on Goroth are poisonous 
to non-natives. The mosses are the least poison- 
ous ofall: any non-Gorothite eating native mosses 
will lose -1D from both Strength and Dexterity for 
a period of 20 hours. The physical symptoms of 
these losses are agonizing cramps, sweating and 
dizziness. 

This loss is cumulative: if a character eats 
native mosses again within 20 hours, he will lose 
a second die from both Strength and Dexterity. 
Worse yet, this cumulative loss does not go away 
until 20 hours after the last time the character ate 
native foodstuffs. In other words, even the stron- 
gest character will eventually die if he has noth- 
ing to eat but native mosses. 


Example: Tirog — lost in Yar’En (the 
“Firelands”) without supplies — unwisely 
decides to settle his hunger pangs by eating 
some native mosses, at 0100 hours. His 
Strength and Dexterity — normally 3D+2 
and 4D respectively — are now decreased to 
2D+2 and 3D respectively. Tirog suffers 
through the cramps and nausea but he is still 
starving to death. 

At 2000 hours the same day, he eats another 
meal of mosses, dropping his Strength and 
Dexterity to 1D+2 and 2D respectively. Tirog 
will not regain any of the dice he lost for 
another 20 hours after his last meal — in 
other words, at 0400 hours the next day (since 
Goroth has a 36 hour day). 

If he were to eat a third meal of local 
mosses before that time, his Strength and 
Dexterity would be 0D+2and 1D respectively. 
Tirog would be too weak to walk, and crippled 
with cramps. 


The situation is even worse if off-worlders eat 
native heterotrophs. A “first-order” heterotroph 
(in other words, a pure herbivore) is more poi- 
sonous than the primitive mosses; a “second- 
order" heterotroph (a carnivore that eats herbi- 
vores, such as aclawcat) is still more poisonous. 
Athird-order heterotroph (acarnivore that preys 
on other carnivores, like a nightdevil) is the most 
poisonous of all. 

An off-world character that eats the flesh of 
any native animal loses a certain number of dice 
from his Strength and Dexterity in exactly the 
same was as discussed above for the mosses. 
The number of dice depends on the “type” of 
animal involved: 


* First-order heterotroph (herbivore): 1D+2 
* Second-order heterotroph (carnivore): 2D 
* Third-order heterotroph (higher predator): 3D 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


Only the most resilient of characters will sur- 
vive more than asingle meal of nightdevil flesh (a 
third-order heterotroph). Certain unwise visi- 
tors to Goroth have learned this to their detri- 
ment. Against the advice of the Colonial Gover- 
nor, a visiting Imperial dignitary insisted on orga- 
nizing a hunting party, which bagged a brace of 
clawcats. Again contrary to all advice, the digni- 
tary had the “game” cooked up for his dinner ... 
and promptly died of hyperbaride poisoning. 


Plant Life 


The mosses of Goroth range from thick, lush 
growths that thrive in damp areas (bordering 
rivers, lakes and oceans) and sprout thick beds 
of slender stalks half a meter tall, to thin and 
hardy growths more like lichens that seem to 
extract the moisture they need from the air. 

The native plants vary in color from rich, dark 
greens to striking oranges and yellows, and even 
as far as garish “neon” shades. All are photosyn- 
thetic; the green mosses use chlorophyll or re- 
lated chemicals, while the more garish species 
use totally different chemical processes. All ab- 
sorb hyperbarides and other contaminants from 
the environment, and all are poisonous to non- 
native lifeforms. 

Thereare no forests, trees or bushes on Goroth, 
Different species and morphologies of moss can 
be found in almost all terrains (except for the 
highest mountain peaks and the worst of the 
volcanic badlands). There are some species that 
thrive in the warm, shallow oceans, either grow- 
ing on the rocky seabeds or forming great, float- 
ing carpets on the surface. 

Unlike true mosses, some of the Gorothite 
floradepend on animals to “cross-pollinate” them 
or to spread their seeds far and wide. For ex- 
ample, the “king moss” produces seed pods that 
are the favored food of b’karri. The seeds within 
these pods cannot germinate until their rock- 
hard outer coating has been stripped away by 
the corrosive digestive juices of a b’karr. Once 
the animal eliminates the undigestible seeds, 
they quickly sprout and begin a new colony of 
king moss. 

Some of these species use color and appear- 
ance cues to attract specific animals. The seed 
pods of the king moss, again, are a bright yellow 
— a hue which seems to preferentially attract 
b’karri. 

Many emit characteristic scents, to which 
specific animals respond. For example, Gorothites 
can smell a “ripe” colony of phytosus moss — a 
delicacy — up to half a kilometer away. While 
native life-forms find most of these scents pleas- 
ant and attractive, most off-worlders would rather 
sniff ammonia or live in a bantha-hide tannery. 


AR=— 
ARST 


Chapter Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness 


ENS 


EE Coron bels ["silverjaws”) flee an immense jer'usk (“widowmaker"}, the behemoth of Goroth’s oceans. 


90 Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


ee AR‘ later Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness 


Chapt” Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness 


Animal Life 


Airborne Creatures 


There are only a few flying creatures that still 
flourish on Goroth, and none of them are very 
big. Only one of these, the skinwing, is a true 
carnivore (in that it kills its prey), although sev- 
eral (including the highglide) are scavengers. 
Following are three of the most common air- 
borne creatures on Goroth Prime. 


m M'Ven (“Swooper”) 
Type: Small avian 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Dodge 6D 
PERCEPTION 3D+1 
STRENGTH 1D 
Move: 18 (flying), 6 (walking) 
Size: 0.25 meters long, 0.6 meters wingspan. 


Capsule: Fast and agile birds, m'vens are the most 
common creatures in the skies of Goroth. They 
have coarse black feathers, with a blood-red patch 
on the chest. They form large, raucous flocks of up 
to 50 individuals, swooping and chasing each other 
throughout their territory, screaming loudly at each 
other with harsh voices. They feed on a single 
species of moss common throughout all but the 
polar regions. They are highly territorial, and will 
swoop down — screaming at the tops of their lungs 
— at any creature, flying or land-based, that enters 
their “turf.” 

While they never physically attack, being beset 
upon by a flock of 50 m’vens is enough to break the 
resolve of just about anyone. Both the Gorothites 
and, recently, the Imperials recognize the territori- 
ality of m'vens. Am'ven “rookery” is better than just 
about any intrusion alarm, since it cannot be 
“jammed.” Once aroused, the screams of a m'ven 
rookery can be heard for more than a kilometer. 


m Highglide 
Type: Large avian scavenger 
DEXTERITY 1D 
Dodge 4D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Search 5D, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 2D 
Special Abilities: 
Silent Movement: Due to the arrangement of its feathers, a 
flying highglide is very difficult to hear. When diving, they 
add +1D+2 to their sneak attempts. 
Claws: When diving, highglides rake with their two tal- 
oned feet (separate attacks, but normal multi-action pen- 
alties). Each inflicts STR+1 damage. 
Beak: Highglides can bite with their powerful hooked 
beaks, but not when stooping on a target. A bite inflicts 
STR+1 damage. 
Move: 16 (flying), 8 (walking) 
Size: 0.8 meters long, 1.8-meter wingspan. 

Capsule: A solitary, high-flying bird, the highglide 
holds a place in ancient Gorothite mythology as a 
symbol of nobility of purpose. In contrast with this 
imagery, however, the true highglide is ascavenger 
that subsists on carrion. Nevertheless, it is a beau- 
tiful creature: a brilliant emerald-green with faint 
highlights of blue that appear almost metallic. It 


roosts in the mountains, but ranges far over the 
lowlands using its exceptionally acute eyesight to 
spot prey from great altitude. Although they feed 
only on the dead, highglides are capable of driving 
all but the largest predator away from a kill. They 
are highly protective of their nests and will attack 
anyone or anything with the temerity or ill luck to 
approach. Highglides are classed as second-order 
heterotrophs. 


m Skinwing 


Type: Ferocious flying predator 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Brawling parry 2D+2, dodge 2D+1 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D+1, stamina 4D 

Special Abilities: 

Claws; Hind claws do STR+1 damage, but only when the 
creature is airborne. 

Bite: A bite does STR+2 damage. 

Wing Buffet: A buffet from the creature's large wings does 
STR+1D stun damage. 

Move: 14 (flying), 4 (walking) 

Size: 1.8 meters long, 3.0-meter wingspan 

Orneriness: 6D 


Capsule: The skinwing is a pseudo-mammal that 
has much the same skull and body conformation as 
a Gorothite except that the bones of its arms are 
greatly elongated, and connected to its body by 
great membranes. The hands lack opposable 
thumbs; all digits — toes and fingers — are tipped 
with long, sharp claws. Although clumsy on the 
ground, the skinwing is an accomplished flier. It 
prefers to attack its prey by swooping down from 
above— perhaps launching itself from a cliff above 
— but it is definitely capable of taking off from the 
ground and climbing to an altitude of several thou- 
sand meters. 

The creature is a ferocious and very dangerous 
predator. They are more common in the moun- 
tains, where they have their lairs (typically small 
caves). Individuals roam far afield, however, and 
skinwing attacks, though rare, do sometimes occur 
within o’bekis. Skinwings are dark, muddy brown 
on their upper surfaces, but are light gray on their 
undersides. They prey on other flying creatures, 
and on land animals up to the size of clawcats. 

Conceivably, an Ewok or a similarly-sized char- 
acter could ride a skinwing, but only with the great- 
est of difficulty. Skinwings are classed as higher 
predators (third-order heterotrophs). 


Ground Creatures 


m B’karr 


Type: Scavenger 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Dodge 5D 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Hide 4D, sneak 4D 

STRENGTH 1D 

Jumping 3D, Swimming 1D+2 

Special Abilities: 

Bite: To save its own life, a b’karr will bite, inflicting STR+1 
damage. 

Poisonous Saliva: lfa b'karr's bite actually inflicts damage, 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


91 


Mike Vilardi 


its saliva inflicts an additional 3D stun damage. 

Poison Resistance: When resisting damage from poison, 
b'karri add +3D to their Strength. 

Camouflage: Because of their natural coloration, b'karri 
get +1D to sneak when hiding in broken rock. 

Move: 13 

Size: 0.3 meters long 


Capsule: B’karri (singular “b’karr”) fall somewhere 
on the spectrum between reptiles and mammals. 
They are egg-layers; however, they are exotherms 
and they secrete milk (both genders) to feed their 
young, once hatched. Their skin is dry and rough, 
almost scaly, with a very sparse pelt. They are dark 
gray or black in base color, but striated with bands 
of gray and brown. In the broken rock of the low- 
lands, their natural home, this coloration makes 
them very hard to spot unless they move. 

B’karri are almost unbelievably prolific, and are 
unarguably the most common form of life — bigger 
than a bacterium, at least — on Goroth. They are 
basically herbivores, but are not above scavenging 
from prey left behind by carnivores. Strictly, how- 
ever, they are classed as first-order heterotrophs. 
Over the last several centuries, the number of 
b’karri has increased by at least an order of magni- 
tude. Once limited to the rough foothills of the 
mountains, now they can be found in all parts of the 
planet. 

Their behavior has changed, too. Once they 
were relatively solitary; now they travel and feed in 
packs of up to 50 individuals. Fortunately, they are 
still timid, and will flee — if they can — from any 
threat. 

Scavenging packs sometimes make their way 


EE A clawcat tackles a nightdevil while b'karr scramble to saftey. 


Chapter Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness nun Bik Rem 
ee 


ARS 


into o’bekis, and individuals sometimes find their 
way inside Imperial and corporate pressures. Most 
sentient Gorothites accept the increasing numbers 
of b’karri as just another trial sent to plague them. 
The off-worlders, however, have been making great 
efforts of late to exterminate the “lizard-rat plague” 
with little success. B’karri are nocturnal. 


m Clawcat 


Type: Cunning mountain predator 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Brawling parry 3D, dodge 3D+1 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Search 4D+1, sneak 5D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 3D 

Special Abilities: 

Paws: Do STR+2 damage. 

Jaws: Do STR+1D damage. 

Hunting Cry: When they attack, clawcats emit a piercing, 
high-pitched scream. This hunting cry is so loud and shrill 
that it inflicts 2D+2 stun damage on any creature — other 
than itself or another clawcat — within 10 meters (the cry 
itself can be heard much further away, but it doesn't do 
damage). This damage cannot be dodged, and body ar- 
mor has no effect. A blast helmet gives +1 protection, 
while a sealed helmet —stormtrooper armor, for example 
— gives +1D protection. Aclawcat can cry once per round. 
Move: 16 

Size: 0.8-1.0 meters tall at the shoulder, up to 2.5 meters 
long 

Orneriness: 6D 


Capsule: Clawcats are fast and agile six-legged preda- 
tors. They are native to the rough mountains of 
Goroth, typically preying on b'karri and other small 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


herbivores. They are totally fearless, however, and 
willattack anything — even a nightdevil—that they 
encounter. Although they are fast enough to chase 
down many smaller animals, they prefer to lie in 
wait for their prey, and then leap from ambush. 
When they attack, they rear up — supported by 
their two hindmost pairs of legs — and deliver 
raking blows with their elongated front limbs. If the 
prey is close enough, they will also deliver a damag- 
ing bite. Once engaged, a clawcat will not withdraw 
from a fight unless it is mortally wounded. Fortu- 
nately, clawcats are solitary hunters (if they worked 
out any kind of cooperative tactics, travelers in the 
mountains would be in serious trouble!). They will 
attack and kill prey even when they are not hungry, 
despoiling anything they do not eat. 

Clawcats are slender, wiry and extremely fast- 
looking. They are mammals, and are covered with 
a short but thick pelt of dark brown fur, shading to 
gray on the underside. Their eyes are small and 
well-protected by bony brow ridges. Long fangs 
protruding from their lower jaw extend past their 
lips even when their mouths are shut. Clawcats are 
diurnal. They are classed as second-order heterotro- 
phs. 


m Nightdevil 


Type: Semi-intelligent mountain predator 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Brawling parry 3D+2, thrown weapons 3D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Search 3D, sneak 2D+2 

STRENGTH 7D 

Special Abilities: 

Claws: Do STR+1D damage. 

Jaws: Do STR+2 damage. 

Low-Light Vision: Nightdevils can see in very dim light 
(verging on total darkness) at no penalty. If exposed to 
“bright” light (anything brighter than a typical noon on 
Goroth), they suffer a +1D penalty to all actions based on 
vision. 

Smell: Nightdevils have a highly developed sense of smell, 
getting a +2D to search when tracking by scent. 
Projectiles: Nightdevils often throw rocks, up to 30 cm in 
diameter, as projectiles. Range for a typical rock the size 
of a Human's head is 2-3/5/10 meters, and will do STR+1D 
damage. 

Move: 10 

Size: 2.5-2.8 meters tall 


Capsule: Very rare nowadays, nightdevils are primi- 
tive relatives of sentient Gorothites whose branch 
of the evolutionary tree diverged long ago. They are 
taller, broader and much stronger than their intel- 
ligent relatives. Their skulls are quite different in 
shape: nightdevils’ foreheads slope back much more 
sharply, vastly reducing the size of the brain case. 
Also, their eyes are larger, and are positioned more 
to the sides of their skulls. Otherwise, however, 
they strongly resemble Gorothites. 

In the high and rugged mountains, nightdevils 
are the pinnacle of the food chain. The fact that they 
seem to be dying out could well arise from the fact 
that contaminants are concentrated the higher one 
goes up the food chain. They usually hunt by night 
— hence their name — but are sometimes abroad 
by daylight. Their eyes allow them to see without 
difficulty — and without penalty — in all but total 
darkness. They shun bright lights, however (“bright” 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


in this context meaning “considerably more bril- 
liant than a typical Goroth noon”). 

By night, nightdevils use their developed sense 
of smell to locate the lairs of clawcats and other 
prey. Using their strong limbs, they tear open the 
lairs and feed. They prefer the young — since they 
don't fight back so hard — but will be quite glad to 
gobble down an adult clawcat or two if nothing else 
is available. 

Nightdevils are classed as “semi-intelligent,” but 
this really only applies to hunting tactics. They 
have an innate sense of tactics, and are almost 
impossible to surprise. They typically hunt in pairs; 
one will often chase its chosen prey into an am- 
bush, where the other kills the target with thrown 
or dropped rocks. Nightdevils have no language, 
however. They are cunning enough to recognize a 
losing fight — unlike clawcats — and will avoid 
stronger foes. 

Instinctively, it seems, nightdevils avoid settle- 
ments of Gorothites. The two species rarely come 
into contact, and when they do, nightdevil attacks 
against Gorothites are exceptionally rare. This is 
not true for Humans and other off-world species, 
however, as Imperial and corporate prospectors 
have found out to their terminal detriment. 
Nightdevils are third-order heterotrophs. 


Ocean Creatures 


m C’Oron Bel (“Silverjaw”) 


Type: Fast aquatic predator 

DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Search 4D 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

Stamina 3D+2 

Special Abilities: 

Jaws: Do STR+2D damage. 

Charge: The c’oron bel can, with a sufficient “run-up,” hurl 
itself rapidly onto the shore, to pursue prey near the 
water's edge. This “charge” has an effective Move of 18, 
but can extend no more than two meters from the water's 
edge. 

Armor: The c’oron bel disposes of excess hyperbarides by 
incorporating metal salts into its scales. As hard as metal, 
these scales provide +1D protection against physical 
attacks, but no protection against energy attacks. 
Move: 18 (swimming), 6 (land) 

Size: 1.5-1.8 meters long 


Capsule: Long, slender and very fast, the c'oron bel 
is a ferocious aquatic predator, feeding on smaller 
fish and anything else it can sink its teeth into. Its 
external anatomy matches the standard fish para- 
digm. It looks roughly like a long, tapered cylinder, 
with a broad caudal fin and small maneuvering fins 
along its length. Its snout is elongated; like some 
species of reptiles, it can unhinge its jaws, allowing 
it to swallow surprisingly large targets. 

Like many Gorothite fish, the c’oron bel is able to 
breathe air for short periods of time, respiring 
through a modified swim-bladder that serves as a 
single primitive lung. Its forefins are thick and 
muscular, and it can drag itself — albeit slowly — 
on land. The c’oron bel seems to be eternally hun- 
gry, and it will attack just about anything, regard- 
less of size. Land animals are not safe from its 


Rc! Chapter Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness 
WA 


93 


Chapter Nine: Adventures in the Wilderness «aaa A A Pte 
=. = Ss Lo O Sa 


attack; if it spots an animal — up to and including 
Human-sized! — within a meter or so of the shore 
(perhaps taking a drink), the creature can surge up 
out of the waterin akind of “charge” attack. Onceon 
land, the creature can remain out of water for up to 
10 minutes. Before it can breathe air, however, it 
must empty the water from its gullet, which it does 
with a loud, distinctive barking sound. The c’oron 
bel is classed as a third-degree heterotroph. 


m Jer'usk (“Widowmaker”) 


Type: Gargantuan aquatic predator 

DEXTERITY 1D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Stamina 12D 

Special Abilities: 

Jaws: Do STR+1D damage. 

Tail-Slap: Ablow from the creature's huge tail does STR+2D 
damage (speeder scale). 

Broach: By hurling itself almost totally clear of the water, 
a jer'usk can crash down upon its prey in a punishing 
impact. A broach inflicts 5D damage (speeder scale). 
Armor: Like the c’oron bel, the jer'usk disposes of excess 
hyperbarides by depositing the material as crystalline 
matter within its thick skin. This material provides +2D 
protection against physical attacks, but only +2 protec- 
tion against energy attacks. 

Engulf: A jer'usk can swallow whole any single creature of 
up to Wookiee sized with a successful bite. Rather than 
doing damage, the attack engulfs the character. Each turn 
thereafter, the engulfed victim takes 4D damage (charac- 
ter scale) from digestive juices; this damage cannot be 
dodged, although armor has normal effects. The charac- 
ter can cut or blast his way out presuming he has a 
suitable weapon on hand (a blaster, perhaps, or ideally a 
vibro weapon or lightsaber). A jer'usk has no armor 
protecting its innards. If the character within — entirely 
on his own — can inflict a wound on the creature, he has 
cut his way free. 

Move: 21 (swimming) 

Size: 75 meters long 

Scale: Speeder 

Orneriness: 6D 


Capsule: The largest life-form on Goroth, the jer'usk 
(plural “jer’uskae”) is aterrifyingly immense animal 
that is as ornery as it is large. It is a pure water- 
breather, incapable of breathing air. 

It normally cruises near the surface of the ocean, 
visible as a huge, dark shape. Its bulk is such that 
even when it does not break the surface it creates 
a visible wake. Although it generally cruises slowly, 
when it wants to — when it is hunting, for example 
— it is capable of bursts of great speed. When 


ARS™ 


sprinting, it is capable of “broaching” — of hurling 
itself almost totally clear of the water, to splash 
down again with great impact. (This is a hunting 
technique; the pressure wave it creates often stuns 
its prey.) 

Generally, jer'uskae are totally unconcerned with 
surface vessels, or vehicles like speeders flying low 
over the oceans; the huge creatures simply pay no 
attention. During their mating season, however, 
and while the males are rearing their calves, adults 
are particularly ornery, and will attack anything 
that comes near them. Low-flying speeders are not 
safe: a broaching jer'usk can arch 20 meters or 
more out of the water to pluck a low-altitude “inter- 
loper” from the air! 

Jeruskae are third-order heterotrophs, feeding 
on other aquatic carnivores. Their thick, hard skin 
is rich in hyperbarides and the corporations have 
begun an experimental “harvest” of jer'uskae using 
heavily-modified skiffs — armed with two power 
harpoons — as “harvesting platforms.” In the areas 
where this harvest has taken place — limited to the 
Ulan Bight, at the moment — the jer'uskae have 
become hypersensitive about any vehicle on or 
near the surface of the ocean, attacking on sight. 
There are hints that jer'uskae can hunt coopera- 
tively: some months ago, four huge jer'uskae coop- 
erated to smash a TaggeCo “harvesting skiff.” 


m Harvesting Skiff 


Craft: Ubrikkian SuperHaul Model IIA mod 3 
Type: Modified Cargo Skiff 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 12 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: skiff (unskilled: -2D) 
Crew: 2, gunners: 2 
Passengers: 2 
Cargo Capacity: 150 metric tons 
Cover: 1/2 
Altitude Range: Ground level-20 meters 
Cost: 32,000 
Maneuverability: 0D 
Move: 45; 130 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D+2 
Weapons: 
Two Power Harpoons 
Fire Arc: 1 front, 1 back 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Fire Control: 1D 
Range: 25-50/100/200 
Damage: 3D 


94 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


—STA 
mm WA 


E Chapter Ten 
Story Starters 


Gamemasters should have little trouble find- 
ing scores of “adventure hooks” in the preceding 
source material. The internecine squabbles be- 
tween the military services, the corporations 
and the underground groups are prime sources 
for interesting adventures. 

To help further, this chapter provides a range 
of “adventure seeds” to involve any and all types 
of characters (Rebels, smugglers, free-traders, 
corporate mercenaries, bounty hunters, and so 
forth) with the emerging crisis on Goroth. Each 
adventure seed will focus on one or more charac- 
ter types, but creative gamemasters should have 
little difficulty modifying them so they are appro- 
priate for any mix of characters that happens to 
be in the game. 


Rogue 

ARebel general has “gone rogue.” Unilaterally, 
she has decided that Goroth is a significant tar- 
get because it is a key source of strategic re- 
sources forthe Empire. Crippling the hyperbaride 
production on Goroth would hurt the Empire 
badly, and thus help the Rebel Alliance. Sup- 
ported by ateam personally loyal to her, she has 
started to smuggle sophisticated weapons to 
some of the more militant underground organi- 
zations on Goroth Prime. She believes — cor- 
rectly — that one of the major obstacles holding 
back the T’B’Dellyi’Mai (“Freedom Action Coun- 
cil") and K’Len J’Bar Kasoon is a lack of serious 
weaponry. By removing that obstacle, she be- 
lieves she can significantly change the dynamic 
on Goroth, making it impossible for the Empire to 
continue producing hyperbarides. 

The Rebel Alliance leadership believes she is 
right — but they fear that she has not adequately 
considered the consequences of her action. Even 
with a stash of weapons, the underground will 
not beable to remove the Imperial presence from 
Goroth. All they will be able to do is make it 
financially impossible for the corporations and 
the Empire to continue “business as usual.” What 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


will the Empire’s reaction be? An all too likely 
response will be sterilization of the planet — 
perhaps using bioagents delivered in missiles 
from orbit. With the world cleansed of the 
“troublesome Gorothites,” the Empire would like 
as not reestablish the hyperbaride facilities us- 
ing other “client-workers” shipped in from other 
systems. 

The characters’ job is to travel to Goroth and 
stop the rogue general before her program of 
arming the insurrectionists goes any further. 
They must operate under several major con- 
straints. First, nobody knows who the rogue 
general's contacts are on the planet. Second, the 
characters cannot let the other Gorothite resis- 
tance movements — particularly the conserva- 
tive Gor’Jen’Ar (“Committee for Free Goroth”) — 
know that there is a schism within the Rebel 
Alliance. Thirdly — and most importantly of all 
— they must prevent the Empire from getting the 
slightest hint of what is happening. If the Empire 
comes to realize that such a scenario might be 
played out — if not now, then in the future—they 
might decide to take preemptive action. 


Passive Resistance 


Over the last several months, heavy Imperial 
crackdowns have led to the capture and execu- 
tion of more than two dozen members of the 
various resistance groups. Morale in the under- 
ground has been plunging. 

But that plunge now seems to have come to an 
end. Anew resistance group — calling itself J’Mer 
Sab (“Night Wind”) — has sprung up, seemingly 
out of nowhere. This new group has claimed 
responsibility for several recent cases of limited 
(but highly effective) sabotage. In each case, the 
actual physical damage caused was minor but it 
was so strategic that it caused slowdowns in 
entire processing plants. J’Mer Sab’s reputation 
is growing by leaps and bounds. Members of 
K’Len J'Bar Kasoon who are tiring of the group’s 
high attrition rate are starting to flock to J'Mer 


Chapter Ten: Story Starters 


Sab, while those members of the Gor’ Jen'Ar who 
are frustrated by the organization's conservative 
agenda are also starting to look favorably on the 
newcomer. 

Through various sources, the characters have 
learned that J’Mer Sab is a fraud — a fake organi- 
zation set up by the Colonial Government, using 
“trustees” from among the native population, 
designed to suck personnel and resources away 
from the real resistance groups. Once J’Mer Sab 
has expanded sufficiently — in other words, 
once a large number of true resistance members 
are sucked in— the Colonial Governor will “bust” 
the organization and net all of them. This will be 
a heavy blow against the “legitimate” resistance 
movements, and a major victory for Governor 
Limoth. 

The characters’ task, then, is to stop this from 
happening: to penetrate J’Mer Sab, and expose it 
as the sham that it is. Not only will this save the 
true resistance movement from a crushing de- 
feat, but it will also strike a major morale blow 
against Limoth. Unfortunately, this will be easier 
said than done. J’Mer Sab has as intense security 
as any real resistance movement. Its “legitimate” 
members — those “true believers” who have 
been sucked in — will automatically distrust any 
off-worlders who try to pry. And the “trustees” 
who are at the heart of J'Mer Sab have even 
greater reason to distrust outsiders. 


Take a Letter 


Through their Gorothite contacts, the charac- 
ters have learned that a member of the Gor’Jen’Ar 
has a package that she wants shipped off-planet 
and distributed to as many other worlds as pos- 
sible. This package reputedly contains a detailed 
description of the Empire’s oppressive activities 
and, for the first time, incontrovertible proof of 
that oppression. (Up until now, all the manifestos 
sent off-world by the Gor’Jen’Ar have been rather 
long on rhetoric and opinion, but notably short 
on indisputable fact.) 


ARS 


When the characters investigate, they find 
that their source is reliable. Presumably, they 
will make arrangements for the turnover. Unfor- 
tunately, the Empire (or perhaps one of the cor- 
porate security arms) has penetrated at least 
one cell of the Gor’Jen’Ar organization. The mani- 
festo the characters have learned of is a fake — 
bait to draw a few more loyal Gor’Jen’Ar mem- 
bers and their off-worlder contacts into a trap. 
Can the characters discover this and save them- 
selves (and their Gorothite contact) from this 
“sting” operation? 


All That Glitters 


One of the characters is a gambler, and has 
come to Goroth— accompanied by the others — 
to check out the casino. They meet another 
professional gambler, by the name of “Jerth 
Merin.” Over a number of days, the gambler 
character starts to realize that there is more to 
Merin than there appears. 

Meanwhile, “Merin” — actually Lt. Jered Pole 
— is in trouble. One of his major contacts within 
the Gorothite underground seems to have been 
“turned” by Imperial security. Although this con- 
tact does not know Pole’s name — real or as- 
sumed — she does know enough to let the Impe- 
rials eventually track him down. Jered has to get 
off-planet — ending his usefulness to the Opera- 
tion Starbird, of course — or find some other way 
to cover his tracks. 

The characters could get drawn into the fray 
in many different ways. Perhaps they will learn 
Pole’s real identity and function, and choose to 
help him get off-planet and then take his place as 
an information conduit. Or perhaps they can 
track down Pole’s contact — who was not 
“turned”, but only captured for interrogation — 
and rescue her. Or they could even find some 
other way of eliminating the evidence that will 
lead the Imperials to Pole. 


96 


Goroth: Slave of the Empire 


» TAR. WARS: 


by Nigel D. Findley 


Four thousand years ago, Goroth was a beautiful trade world. Caught 
between two warring factions that coveted its resources, Goroth was 
too difficult to occupy, yet too valuable to remain free. The solution was 
destruction: after “The Scouring,” Goroth was forever changed into a 
wasteland. 


Now, the native Gorothites are beginning to rebuild their civilization, 
but the horrors of the past have come to haunt the present. 


Yet again the world is caught between two warring factions: the 
Empire and the Rebel Alliance. 


Yet again the world is too valuable to remain free: rich deposits of 
hyperbarides have brought the galaxy’s megacorporations. 


Will Goroth suffer the same fate a second time? 


SIE INKS WARS 


U PSE EOM fen Neat 


For ages 12 and up. 


®, TM & © 1995 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. 
Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


A supplement for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game 


0-87431-250-7 $15-00 


NN 


18874 


