STAR WARS 
GUNDARK’S 


FANTASIIC:. 
TECHNOLOGY” 


PERSONAL GEAR 


a — 
, an S . z s 
s$ 
= ` g ` s J A ’ 
“ a , 4 a? f 
5 4 ~— F " ‘ 
a A x 1 ” À s 
4 ’ 
A RJ A »* GA £, * 
a ~ ” Á i 
$ E DJ m + a ) n A 
r ae 4 $ > e 
e ad A a p? ~- 
n 5-2 $ r) i 
a A ~ y 
aS CS n 0) r 
A ~ R 
ad > 
3 4 > 5 
,? n a Loa ¥ 
A * 
J _* * 
> 
a 
a Ry y 4 ae y č 
m DJ s a a 
= A 
a ; n 
* 
> > a 
2 a 


Development, Editing and Original Material 
Jen Seiden and Eric S. Trautmann 


Cover Design & Interior Graphics 


Tim Bobko 


New Inrerior Art 


Jerry DeCrotie 


Playtesting and Advice 
Tim O'Brien, Peter Schweighofer, George R. Strayton, Paul Sudlow 


This book contains material gathered from several sourcebooks, supplements and 
The Official Star Wars Adventure Journal. The editors would like to thank the many 
authors and artists—too numerous to list here—who created the equipment 
contained in this volume. 


ae 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter 
Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter 
Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran 
Editors: Steve Miller, Fred Jandt, Peter Schweighofer, 
George Strayton, Paul Sudiow, Eric $. Trautmann 
Editorial Assistant: Jen Seiden 
Graphic Artists: Tim Bobko, Tom ONeill, Brian Schomburg 
Sales Manager: Jeff Kent 
Assistant Sales Director: Tim OBrien 
Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden 
Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill 
Accounting: Karen Bayly, Mary Galant, Wendy Lord 
Billing: Sue Hartung 


E-Mail è Editorial: WEGEdit@aol.com + Art: WestEndAr@aol.com 
Sales: WEGSales@aol.com » Licensing and Administration: WEGLicAdm@aol.com 


Published by West End Games # RR 3 Box 2345 * Honesdale, PA 18431 


TM or ® G © 1997 Lucasfilm Ltd. Title and character and place names protected by all applicable trademark laws. 
All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. 


Chapter One: Melee Weapons 

Chapter Two: Projectile Weapons and Slugthrowers 
Chapter Three: Energy Weapons 

Chapter Four: Missile and Grenade Launchers 
Chapter Five: Missiles, Grenades and Explosives 
Chapter Six: Armor and Armor Attachments 
Chapter Seven: Conveyances 

Chapter Eight: Restraint Devices 

Chapter Nine: Tools and Miscellaneous Equipment 
Chapter Ten: Survival Equipment 

Chapter Eleven: Entertainment and Leisure Devices 


CONTENTS 


Chapter Twelve: Communications, Recording and Imaging Gear__ 87 


Chapter Thirteen: Computer Equipment 
Chapter Fourteen: Security Devices 

Chapter Fifteen: Scanners and Detection Gear 
Chapter Sixteen: Specialty Items 


100 
105 


To: Commander Drev Prilarca, NRSF Arms Interdiction 

Task Force 

From: Major Shepprd Barron, CorSec (retired) 

RE: “Gundark” Arms Ring 

Commander: 

As per your request (datapad ref. 92847/98234), | have 
managed to retrieve files from the CorSec criminal data- 
base regarding the individual who operates under the alias 
“Gundark’—his dossier is attached to this transmission. 

| have also acquired a copy of the illegal database that 
“Gundark’” maintains, apparently as a sort of catalog. This 
catalog is encrypted and covertly inserted into local HoloNet 
carrier signals, particularly any governmental or law en- 
forcement bandwidths; apparently “Gundark” has a keen 
sense of irony. 


Regards, 


Maj. Shepprd Barron 


ee Barron, CorSec (retired) 


GET Gs 


he fr 


iv: a ti 


Organization Profile: The “Gundark” Arms Ring 
Type: Illegal Arms and Equipment Dealers 
Crime Boss/Leadership: “Gundark” (real name unknown) 


Principal Criminal Activities: Illegal transportation of unregistered weapons, posses- 
sion and sale of contraband military weapons, possession and sale of contraband military 
explosives, possession and sale of stolen property, theft, assault. 


Criminal Affiliations: Unknown. 


Territory: Unknown. Last seen in the Elshandruu Pica region. Outer Rim Territories— 
from Minos Cluster to Parmic Sector—appears to be “Gundark’s” primary base of 
operations. 


Payroll: Unknown. 


Violence Index: 35 (“Gundark” typically engages in violent activity only when he is near 
capture). 


Suspect Profile: The individual known as 
“Gundark” has never been identified, and his 
origins are unknown. It is believed that he was 
once affiliated with Black Sun, but his ties to 
this once-feared criminal organization have 
since been cut. Few reliable descriptions of 
this individual have been obtained, though the 
following facts are believed to be reasonably 
accurate: 


Height: 2.2 meters 


Sex: Male 
Age: Between 38—42 years old 
Species: Unknown, possibly a Houk. 


Scars/Distinguishing Marks: “Gundark” 
has a thick, heavy build, indicating he was born 
and raised on a world of higher-than-standard 
gravity. He is bald, and his face is typically 
obscured by sunvisors or goggles at all times. 
(See artist's simulation.) 


CorSec Evaluation: “Gundark"—through ex- 
tensive contacts—has been a major arms 
dealer, specializing in military-grade weapons 
and explosives. The apprehension and incar- 
ceration of this criminal should be made a top 
priority. 


Gundark’s Fantastic 
Technology: Personal Gear 


Gundark's Fantastic Technology: Personal Gear 
is a compilation of equipment intended for use 
with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second 
Edition. The information in this volume is pre- 
sented from the point-of-view of individuals that 
operate within the black market. As a result, sev- 
eral of the items found in this volume are not only 
highly illegal, but extremely rare and should be 
used carefully in gameplay. However, many other 
items are more commonplace and can be found in 
more legal venues. 

In addition to game stats, most entries in this 
book contain “notes” (uploaded to Gundark’s 
weapons database by smugglers, slavers, thieves 
and other such unsavory types). Some of these 
comments are intended as scenario hooks. Oth- 


ers are intended to suggest modifications to equip- 
ment. Several of the addendums contain sugges- 
tions on how and why weapons and equipment 
malfunction; these suggestions can easily be used 
if a player rolls a “1” on the Wild Die. 


Timeline 


This version of Gundark’s Gear Datalog is pub- 
lished during the New Republic era. Some of the 
equipment listed in this volume is not available 
during the “Classic” Star Wars era (between Star 
Wars: A New Hope and Return of the Jedi ). Items 
that are only available during the New Republic 
era are marked with an asterisk (*) in the entry's 
availability code. Most of these items could have 
been found during the previous years of Imperial 
Rule; this is still a black-market guide, so not much 
will have changed in terms of price or availability. 


Gundark’s Gear Datalog 


Gather round, grubbers: Gundark’s back! It’s been a while since I put out a datalog for you 
“esteemed” customers and some of you have been hounding me to update the inventory scandoc. 


So here's the latest Gear Datalog. 


Now remember, | wouldn’t be talking about these items if I didn’t have samples of them in my 
possession, so look through the datalog and make up your wish list. When you know what you want 
in your greedy little hands, come find Gundark. (Contacts can be arranged via the HoloNet; match 
bandwidth with the carrier wave that brought you the Gear Datalog and I'll be in touch.) 


The Black Market 


“Illegal commercial practices—the sale and distri- 
bution ofarmaments, medicines, droids, computers, 
explosives and other such commodities—is to be- 
come a top priority of His Royal Majesty's Customs 
and Navy. Emperor Palpatine decrees that all such 
illicit commerce be stopped immediately, and all 
troops must make the destruction of these so-called 
“black marketeers” a high priority. The unlicensed 
sale of goods has always been an offense; it hence- 
forth will be upgraded to a Class One infraction, and 
officers of the Imperial military should exercise all 
possible force to root out these traitors under direc- 
tion of the Imperial Bureau of Taxation, Division 
Three. "—Excerpt from a memorandum prepared 
by Imperial Advisor Ars Dangor shortly before the 
Battle of Hoth. 

“Nothing is illegal...provided you have enough 
money, "—Attributed to an unidentified arms mer- 
chant. 


Background 


The black market—sometimes referred to as 
the Invisible Market—is a catch-all term that de- 
scribes the illegal sale of commodities. The illegal- 
ity of these transactions is relative: selling food 
without a permit is not as serious a crime as selling 
blasters, grenades or lightsabers. Still, black- 
marketeering is a serious offense. The Empire— 
particularly during the early stages of the Rebel- 
lion—instituted severe crackdowns on smuggling 
and the sale of contraband, largely to prevent 
munitions from falling into the Alliance’s hands. 

A newly-formed division of the Imperial Bureau 
of Taxation—Division Three—was created to di- 
rect the campaign against black market trade. 
Division Three (D-3) was little more than a 
CompForce detachment with a loose affiliation 
with the Imperial Bureau of Taxation. Given 
CompForce's rather extreme methods of problem 
solving, this led to a very aggressive campaign 
against the black market. 


As a result of D-3s actions, many smaller busi- 
nesses that once escaped official notice (and con- 
sequently avoided the Imperial bureaucracy that 
governs commerce permits) became targets of 
Imperial scrutiny. Hundreds of merchants that 
operated unlicensed food and droid shops were 
incarcerated, while thousands more were fined or 
subjected to property seizure. In many cases D-3s 
actions were extremely violent, and a shocking 
seventy percent of the individuals apprehended 
required medical attention. In the short term, the 
Imperial anti-contraband campaign was success- 
ful, though the measure had long-term effects 
detrimental to the Empire. 

Several of these merchants—or members of 
their families—joined the Alliance, railing at the 
injustice of D-3s campaign. After the Battle of 
Endor, the New Republic began to quietly shut 
down black market operations as well. The irony 
of this was not lost on the Provisional Council; the 
Rebel Alliance had purchased much of their equip- 
ment through illegal channels. Rather than arrest 
black marketeers, the New Republic offered am- 
nesty, tax credits and other inducements to con- 
vince the illegal traders to “go legit.” (The pro- 
gram was modestly successful, though a handful 
of black marketeers refused to be “bought out” by 
the government; such individuals—Gundark in- 
cluded—are still counted fugitives.) 

The Black Market is not an organized group. 
Instead, acollection of individuals who seek higher 
profits than what can be gained through the legiti- 
mate sale of commodities. Many black marketeers 
are simple merchants who tired of Imperial or 
New Republic trade restrictions, while others sim- 
ply enjoy the risks. Several corporations and le- 
gitimate businesses recognized the potential profit 
that could be gained by tacitly supporting black 
market operations; a blaster pistol can sell for as 
much as five times the normal retail price on the 
black market. By “accidentally” misrouting ship- 
ments of goods to deniable agents, corporations 
could gather a large amount of untraceable wealth. 

Such operations are usually high-risk ventures: 
the penalty for black marketeering under the 
Empire was extremely stiff, and is only slightly 
less stringent under the New Republic. 


Black Market Operations 


Given the wildly individualistic nature of most 
black markeeters, there is no true “pattern” or 
organizational model to follow. A few traits are 
shared by most black marketeers, however. 


e Secrecy. Black marketeers survive by remaining 
hidden from official notice. Most black marketeers 
subject potential clients to rigorous background 
checks, sometimes lasting as long as a standard 
year. These checks include discreet inquiries into 
aclient’s past, friends, family, political affiliation, 


Division Three Field Agent 
Type: CompForce Special Officer 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Blaster 6D, dodge 6D, melee combat 5D, melee parry 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 
Alien species 4D, law enforcement 6D, law enforcement: 
D-3 legal codes 7D, planetary systems 5D, streetwise 7D 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
Astrogation 4D, space transports 5D, starship gunnery 
6D, starship shields 6D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 5D, command 5D, command: D-3 assault troop- 
ers 8D, search 6D, sneak 6D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 6D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Computer programming/repair 4D 
Character Points: Varies; typically 5-15 
Move: 10 


Equipment: Heavy blaster pistol (5D), knife (STR+1D), 
stun cuffs (4D stun damage), datapad, military protocol 
droid, 5,000 credits. 


Division Three Assault Trooper 
Type: CompForce Special Agent 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Blaster 5D, dodge 6D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 
Law enforcement 5D, survival 5D 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Investigation 5D, search 5D, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Character Points: Varies; typically 2-7 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster rifle (5D), power armor (+1D en- 
ergy, +2D physical), heavy blaster pistol (5D), three 
grenades (5D), knife (STR+1D), medpac 


financial status, and other such data. If the indi- 
vidual has no ties to law-enforcement agencies or 
other official organizations, the black marketeer 
will usually allow a client to make contact, often 
through an intermediary. 


¢ Security. Physical security is of paramount im- 
portance to black marketeers, particularly when 
dealing with a customer. Since a client is willing to 
break the law in dealing with the black marketeer, 
the client is clearly not someone who can be 
trusted. Security measures—bodyguards, elec- 
tronic surveillance, body armor, personal force 
fields, and so on—are always in place well in 
advance. In addition, most weapons dealers will 
not sell the customer a complete weapon pack- 
age, directing the client to an alternate location 
(well removed from the marketeer’s getaway 
route) to collect ammunition, power packs, deto- 
nators and other weapon components. 


e Anonymity. Most black marketeers refuse to 
use their true names, preferring to rely on a string 
of aliases. While CorSec, D-3 or other law-enforce- 
ment agency can track a marketeer by fingerprint 


or genetic marker, a convincing false identity can 
muddy up the trail considerably. 


e Mobility. Avoiding patterns is the best way fora 
black marketeer to evade capture. Most black 
marketeers move from sector to sector, relying on 
secure transmissions word-of-mouth to lure po- 
tential customers. 


* Market knowledge. The law of supply and de- 
mand applies to black marketeers, perhaps more 
than it does to mainstream, legitimate businesses. 
When a government declares a particular com- 
modity to be illegal, it creates instant demand for 
that product—and increases the profit margin for 
the seller as well. A prohibition against blasters 
allows a black marketeer to fetch an outrageous 
price for a BlasTech DL-18. Unfortunately, the 
punishment meted out if he is caught is usually 
equally outrageous, 


Contacting The Black Market 


Most black marketeers are not easy to contact. 
The following are suggested methods of locating 
and communicating with illegal traders: 


* Corrupt officials. Many port officials—typically 
overworked and underpaid—receive small kick- 
backs from black marketeers. The official simply 
directs those seeking contraband dealers to a pre- 
arranged meeting site. (This site is usually chosen 
by the black marketeer because it affords the best 
chance to observe the potential client without 
being detected.) Most corrupt port officials will 
also insist on a “security deposit” (a bribe) from 
player characters seeking to make contact with 
the black market. 


illustration by Mike Vilardi 


* Infochants. Most information merchants exist 
on the fringes of the criminal element and—as a 
matter of professionalism—keep tabs on many 
black market operations. Infochants do not often 
reveal this information except at an extremely 
high price (to avoid reprisals in the event that the 
client is not legitimate). 


¢ HoloNet. A favorite trick of many black 
marketeers is to piggyback contact information— 
in highly encrypted form—onto local holonet trans- 
missions. If a client knows the proper bandwidth 
and decryption algorithm, it is possible to contact 
the illegal trader. Gundark favors this method of 
contact, and even posts his catalog of wares by 
slicing into holonet transmissions. 


© Cynabar’s Infonet. Cybanar’s Infonet, an illegal 
newsnet service for smugglers, often supplies 
information on black market operations, and many 
black marketeers post contact information there. 


* Word-of-Mouth. Perhaps the most dangerous 
method of contacting a black marketeer is word- 
of-mouth. Smugglers, arms dealers and other un- 
savory types are not noted for their integrity. Any 
rumors about black marketeers should be taken 
as extremely sketchy. A favorite tactic of law- 
enforcement sting operations is to seed a cantina 
with undercover agents selling bogus contact in- 
formation to would-be clients. These clients are 
given information that leads them directly into 
custody. Still, some black marketeers—Gundark 
included—rely heavily on word-of-mouth to hawk 
their wares. 


ws 
oa 
2 
L 


uwao 


= 


Dematoil 

Ekkar Arms Coyn’skar 
Ekkar Arms D'skar 
Ekkar Arms Sat'skar 
Hand-held Contact Stunner 
Neuronic Whip 
Rantok 

Stun Baton 

Stun Baton (Z2) 

Stun Cloak 

Stun Gauntlets 

Taser Staff 
Vibrodagger 
Vibrorapier 
Vibro-saw 

Zenji Needles 


Dematoil 


The Bitthzvrian dematoil is a custom-designed 
morningstar that is not only a potent personal 
combat tool but also the ultimate symbol of a 
Bitthzvrian warrior’s ability. The spikes of the 
weapon's ball are quills taken from warriors the 
wielder has defeated in person combat. The greater 
the warrior, the more quills on the weapon and the 
more damage it will do. 

All Bitthzevrians have large quills on their el- 
bow joints; the stronger and older they become, 
the larger these quills become. Most great war- 
riors have quills of considerable size: if they are 
bested, the warrior who has defeated them is 
given the right to take the largest quill of 
their weapon arm and affix it to his 
dematoil. 


Dematoil 
Type: Bitthevrian Morningstar 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee combat: dematoil 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Body: 3D-5D+1 
Difficulty: Moderate-difficult 
Damage: STR+1D-STR+3D 
Game Notes: The damage of a dematoil is dependent upon 
the greatness of the warrior and how many personal victo- 
ries he has had. 


“Credman”/44:9:4:85/Rale This is one of those 
collectable items that you can only get when you 
pry the cold, dead fingers of the previous owner 
off of it. I was able to get one with no quills on it, 
only because | went to Guiteica and stayed there 
for a couple of years, successfully learning what 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Melee Weapons 


materials the dematoil was made out of. | built the 
basic ball and chain, but I don’t think I'll ever 
touch one that has a quill onit. If anyone ever finds 
one, you make sure to contact me through these 
channels; I'll take it off your hands, no questions 
asked and a lot of money paid. 


Ekkar Arms Coyn’skar 
The coyn’skar is a pole weapon with a lengthy, 
sharp blade on one end and a hook at the base. 
The shaft is tooled in such away as to offer maxi- 
mum grip. The hook can be used to trip or disarm 
an opponent. 


Ekkar Arms Coyn’skar 


illustration by Mike Vilardi 


Model: Ekkar arms coyn'skar 

Type: Coynite bladed pole 

Skill: Melee combat 

Cost: 400 

Availability: 3 

Difficulty: Moderate (blade), Very Difficult (disarm with 

hook 

eae STR+2D (blade), STR+2 (hook) 
Dr. Itlar/40:8:5:62/Cha* When it comes to melee 
weapons, Ekkar Arms has a gift for crafting items 
of great beauty. I have owned a coyn’skar for a 
couple of years now; I get together with a couple 
of friends of mine and we occasionally practice 
dueling with them. I'm proud that | own a com- 
plete set of Ekkar arms combat weapons; | got 
them ona visit to the Coynite factory. Oh, sure, it’s 
not like they are really any use in day-to-day life, 
but I think they are some of the most beautiful 
weapons around. 


Ekkar Arms D’skar 


The D'skar is a dagger, the most common 
weapon among the Coynites. These weapons are 
known for their fine craftsmanship and 
deadly blades. D’skar range in length 
from 30 centimeters toa half-meter 
and each D'skar is unique. 
These weapons are ex- 
tremely durable and have 
been known to last for 
centuries with proper 
care. 


Mike Vilard 


Ekkar Arms D’skar 
Model: Ekkar Arms D'skar 
Type: Coynite dagger 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 150 
Availability: 3 
Difficulty: Moderate 


Damage: STR+1D+1 

Red/44:3:6:23/Atze The d'skar is probably the 
easiest Coynite weapon to find off-planet, but if 
you do find one, | bet the price will easily have 
quadrupled. It’s probably best to wander over to 
Coyn and visit the Ekkar Arms site. Just remem- 
ber, when you get your blade, don’t show off with 
it on Coyn—they are very serious about their 
planetary rules and breaking any of them can 
mean death. 


Ekkar Arms Sat'skar 


The sat’skar is another Coynite weapon—a long, 
sharp-edged sword that is extremely difficult to 
master. The blade is grooved, creating a serrated 
edge that inflicts terrible wounds. 


illustration by Mike Vilardi 


Ekkar Arms Sat'skar 
Model: Ekkar Arms sat'skar 
Type: Coynite sword 
Skill Melee combat 
Cost: 700 
Availability: 3 
Difficulty: Difficult (Very Difficult if swung one-handed) 
Damage: STR+3D+1 (if swung one-handed, damage is only 
STR+1D) 


Dr. Ithar/42:8:2:94/Chae The sat'skar is probably 
the hardest to find of any Ekkar Arms’ products. 
Sat’skars take so long to make and have such 
craftsmanship in them that they are reserved for 
the warriors of their world rather than allowing 
offworlders access to them. 


Hand-Held Contact Stunner 


The contact stunner is a hand-to-hand stun 
weapon developed for bodyguards and security 
forces. Easy to operate and conceal, the weapon is 
quiet and non-lethal. 

The CS-12 is a small cylinder, 15 centimeters 
long and 5 centimeters in diameter. A flat disk with 
13 contact studs protrudes from the forward end; 
it delivers a silent electronic stun charge. Since 
the CS-12 is made of consumer-grade materials it 
can be smuggled through most weapons detec- 
tors. 


Hand-Held Contact Stunner 

Model: SoroSuub CS-12 Stun Master 

Type: Contact stunner 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat: contact stunner 

Ammo: 5 

Cost: 575, (power cells: 15) 

Availability: 2, R 

Damage: 4D+2 stun 

Game Notes: Very Easy difficulty to use; Easy to hide (+2D 

to hide against weapon detectors, +1D against physical 

searches). 
Lowwel/44:9:4:86/Klue The Stun Master certainly 
made my job a lot easier. I'd disguise myself as a 
merchant and buy passage aboard aluxury cruiser. 
Halfway into the tour, I'd start taking out the 
security guards and eventually get to the pilots. 
Once they were out, I'd steer the ship over to 
where my buddies were waiting. After taking as 
much plunder as we could hold, we'd just let the 
cruiser drift off on its way. This way, there was no 
mess, no one could identify us and the bounty on 
us was as light as you could get because we never 
killed anyone. 


Neuronic Whip 


This terrible weapon is adored by serious 
slavers. From out of the black handle comes along 
thin strand of wire which can pack quite a wallop 
in electricity. With a small switch on the handle, 
the user can knock out a man in a single blow. For 
the more sadistic, there is a second setting which 
actually injures the victim instead of stunning 
him. 


lliustraton by Jerry DeCrotie 


Neuronic Whip 

Model: TholCorp Neuronic Whip 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat: neuronic whip 

Cost: 700 

Availability: 4, X 

Difficulty: Easy 

Damage: STR+1D or 5D stun (two settings) 

Game Notes: Power pack lasts for three hours. 
Lowwel/43:2:8:33/Lia® With all the different stun 
weapons and such out there, there is no real 
reason for such a cruel weapon to exist, except 
that slavers feel the need not only to overpower 
their victims, but to degrade them. Those who 
own neuronic whips are usually, in my opinion, 
fairly evil critters. 


Ellylyn/43:2:8:92/Sule Spare me. The whip is not 
such a bad weapon and more than that, it keeps 
people in line. I have never had a problem with any 
of my people when my neuronic whip was in my 
hand. However, I put it down for a moment and | 
was nearly shot by a runaway who decided he 
could take me. All because | didn't have a symbol 
of authority with me. 


Lowwel/43:3:1:54/Lia® That's what you get when 
you rule through fear. Next time, try exercising 
some leadership. 


Rantok 


The rantok is an ancient Ka’hren sword that 
was used by the Unfyr warriors centuries ago. The 
weapon consists of a thick straight blade approxi- 
mately a third of a meter long. On each side of the 
hilt is a large crossguard that thrusts upward, 
much like the daggers of the Fpi Assassins. On the 
flat side of the blade are small quillion which are 


Wustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


used to catch the blades of enemy swords. The 
rantok was designed to be used either one- or two- 
handed: it is lethal either way. 

The Unfyr used the sword for any and all mili- 
tary purposes and it was also a highly regarded 
ceremonial weapon. For ages, it was used by all 
Ka’hren warriors. It remained the preferred 


Ka'hren weapon even after the introduction of 
ranged weapons. Eventually, however, blasters 
and such weaponry replaced the blades, and the 
Unfyr, unwilling to accommodate the new tech- 
nology, have essentially become extinct. 


Rantok 

Type: Sword 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat: rantok 

Cost: Not available for sale 

Availability: 4 

Difficulty: Difficult 

Damage: STR+1D+1 (one-handed), STR+2D+1 (two-handed) 

Game Notes: When used two-handed, reduce the difficulty 

one level, but no parries are possible. 
“Credman”/43:3:2:48/Rale | have been offered 
tens of thousands of credits for my rantok; | still 
won't sell it. It was practically luck that | found 
mine in the first place and I have no desire giving 
it up after that. It’s a difficult weapon to use (the 
shape and weight make it unwieldy for those of my 
stature) but, with practice, it is a formidable and 
beautiful piece of weaponry. 


Stun Baton 


The stun baton is a short club with a small 
power pack in the handle. When activated, the 
power pack generates a stun charge on the end of 
the club (a power pack lasts for three hours of 
consecutive use). 


Illustration by Stom Cook 


Stun Baton 
Model: Merr-Sonn Stun Baton 
Type: Stun baton 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee combat: stun baton 
Cost: 300 


Availability: R 

Difficulty: Easy 

Damage: STR+2D+2 (includes stun charge; STR+1D if stun 
charge is not on) 

Game Notes: Power pack lasts for three hours. 


Holam/39:4:9:01/Bese Stun batons became very 
popular after the New Republic eased certain 
weapons restrictions. After living under Imperial 
rule for so long, there was a small surge in petty 
crimes (as certain elements felt the need to exer- 
cise their freedom), Law-enforcement agencies 
were immediately supplied with as many stun 
batons as could be found. They sufficiently pre- 
vented would-be criminals from committing of- 
fenses by reminding them that there was still an 
authority to answer to. 


Stun Baton (Z2) 


Astun baton commonly used by many slavers, 
riot police and beings whose job it is to control 
other sentients, the Merr-Sonn Z2 is a popular 
two-setting baton that can be used as its name so 
implies, or (and seemingly more often) for lethal 
force. 


Stun Baton (Z2) 

Model: Merr-Sonn Z2 Stun Baton 

Type: Stun baton 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Melee combat: stun baton 

Cost: 400 

Availability: R 

Difficulty: Easy 

Damage: STR+1D or 5D stun (two settings) 

Game Notes: power pack lasts for three hours. 
Shi’lin/36:3:6:16/Gele The Z2 packs quite a punch 
when used with the stun setting. Merr-Sonn meant 
it for peace-time officers, but ended up giving an 
edge to the slavers as well. You can’t really accuse 
slavers of using the lethal force setting often; 
remember, property damaged is worthless. I don’t 
think any of our crew ever used a stun baton to kill 
a slave in the entire time | was on the circuit. Even 
after | gave up command and retired, I still hear 
from the guys and they've not lost a slave yet to 
either an escape or a beating. That, let me tell you, 
is a very good record. 


Stun Cloak 


Originally designed as a personal defense sys- 
tem, this meter-long habit is also effective as an 
offensive target at close range. Specially designed 
fibers on the outside of the cloak give this garment 
its particularly attractive metallic sheen. When 
brought into contact with living tissue, however, 
these fibers also act to electrostatically adhere to 
the target’s body. Once activated by a hand-held 
relay (disguised as the cloak’s clasp), the garment 
produces a focused electrical charge capable of 
stunning the acquisition into submission. 


Stun Cloak 
Model: Koromondain PDS, Inc. Model SVT-300 
Type: Stun cloak 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee combat 
Ammo: 3 before power cell is temporarily depleted; holds 
total of 8 charges 
Cost: 1,500 
Availability: 2 
Difficulty: Moderate (Easy if target is attacking) 
Damage: 5D (stun damage) 


Game Notes: The stun cloak has a micro cell that recycles 
in three minutes after the initial three charges are used. 
The cell can be powered up from any external generator in 
two rounds. A target must make a Difficult melee parry or 
brawling parry to avoid contact with the cloak. 


WWustration by David Plunkett 


Staven/40:6:1:97/Nare | had a stun cloak when I 
was thieving for a small-time criminal organiza- 
tion—the Red Star Ring. We had pulled enough 
money together to buy one and | was chosen to 
wear it because | was so young and frail-looking 
that I seemed the easy target. The scam was 
simple: the other guys in the outfit would fake an 
attack on me and leave me in the street. The first 
person who reached down to help me up was 
zapped by the stun cloak and | made off with the 
unfortunate individual's credit voucher. 


Stun Gauntlets 


Stun gauntlets typically appear to be a pair of 
standard heavy gauntlets with extremely long 
cuffs. The gauntlets conceal a tiny battery con- 
nected to a mesh of contact wiring over an insu- 
lated glove which, when activated, delivers a stun 
charge on contact. Stun gauntlets can be useful 


ation by Storni Cook 


Illustr 


when a combatant is disarmed of more conven- 
tional weapons. 


Stun Gauntlets 
Model: Palandrix Personal Protection Gear Stun Gauntlets 
Type: Hand-to-hand stun gauntlets 
Skill: Brawling 
Ammo: 1() charges 
Cost: 300 
Availability: 2 
Difficulty: Easy 
Damage: STR+2D 


Fal’Orssk/44:8:5:29/Arke | always wore a pair of 
stun gauntlets when I was smuggling on worlds 
with laws against carrying weapons. Sooner or 
later, a bounty hunter or angry marketer would 
decide to try to take me somewhere and I'd have 
to fight. Rather than risk breaking the law and face 
bigger problems, I wore the gauntlets and let 
loose with a barrage of punches at whoever was 
trying for me. | didn’t even have to hit well, just 
hard. 


Linzre/44:8:8:02/Tale You have to be careful with 
stun gauntlets; the insulation between the stun 
charge delivery system and your skin can break 
down, especially for species—like the Rodians— 
whose perspiration or skin oils are somewhat 
acidic. When the insulation goes, the stun charge 
can back up on you and knock you flat. 


Taser Staff 
Once the standard melee weapon of Coruscant 
Guards, the taser staff is a potent weapon for 
crowd control and riot suppression. Able to de- 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


liver a lethal or stunning charge, the weapon 
literally crackles with energy when it strikes a 
target. The weapon is balanced and each end is 
weighted, making the weapon quite effective even 
after the power pack has been fully drained. It’s 
quite light at only 10 kilograms and it can be 
separated into three pieces to be carried in a 
backpack. 


Taser Staff 
Model: Merr-Sonn Taser Staff 
Type: Taser staff 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee combat: taser staff 
Ammo: 50 (charges) 
Cost: 500 (power packs: 40) 
Availability: 4, R 
Body: 2D 
Difficulty: Moderate 
: 5D or 5D stun (uncharged attack 
caused STR+1D damage 


“Credman”/39:9:3:85/Csce After the 
Coruscant Guards were vanquished, 
the taser staff became extremely 
collectible, particularly among New 
Republic sympathizers on Imperial 
Center. 


Dallysin/39:9:7:01/Bore The taser 
staff is restricted weaponry on 
Coruscant lately. Apparently some 
Black Sun remnants hijacked a load 
of these things from the New Repub- 
lic armory docks and rampaged through the 
Coruscant undercity. As a result, there was an NRI 
crackdown on the weapon after a rash of muggings 
and burglaries. 


Hellic/40:0:0:76/Csce | actually managed to ob- 
tain a taser staff and shipped it off Coruscant. | 
discovered one major flaw with the “collapsible” 
option: once the weapon is separated into three 
pieces, it is prone to damage. If you mistreat the 
weapon in its disassembled state, it may be impos- 
sible to put it back together when you need it. 


Vibrodagger 


The Talon is a favorite among pirates, Infiltra- 
tors, Imperial Storm Commandos, and others who 
need to operate silently or cheaply. Purely func- 
tional, these deadly weapons have virtually no 
aesthetic appeal, but are efficient weapons in 
properly skilled hands. 


Vibrodagger 
Model: LaserHone Talon Vibrodagger 
Type: Personal combat vibroblade 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 50 
Availability: 2, R 
Difficulty: Easy 
Damage: STR+2D (maximum: 6D) 


r -i 

wet weer ae 

Firda 
aya 


Aiden/42:7:2:39/Csce It seems everyone these 
days is carrying a vibrodagger; of course, that is 
the way LaserHone’s marketing department 
planned it. The Talon is extremely cheap, easy to 
use and makes no sound. This makes it one of the 
best weapons for small-time killers and thieves. I'll 
admit it, I've got one too. It comes in handy in any 
situation. 


illustration by Storn Cook 


Drayton/42:9:1:05/Core Actually, the vibrodagger 
makes a handy tool for slicing open magnaseals on 
cargo crates. Forget the vibrodagger’s obvious 
combat applications; as a shipjacking or thieving 
tool, it is blasted effective. 


Vibrorapier 

The LaserHone Duelist vibrorapier is a particu- 
larly elegant vibroweapon, carried by nobles, 
gentlebeings and those who like to maintain an air 
of roguishness. LaserHone vibroweapons have a 
greatly attractive feature: unlike many 
vibroweapons, LaserHones are silent (actually 
ultrasonic), lacking the high-pitched whine that is 
so common to weapons of this type. 

Besides its good looks, the vibrorapier has 
another purpose in the modern day. Used by 
pirates and privateers, it is preferred to a blaster 
during boarding actions, when a stray energy bolt 
could punch through a ship, killing everyone. 


Vibrorapier 
Model: LaserHone Duelist Vibrorapier 
Type: Personal combat vibroblade 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 300 
Availability: 2, R 
Difficulty: Moderate 
Damage: STR+3D (maximum: 7D) 


Capt. Rislar/41:9:4:04/Crie One of the first things 
Igave my crewtowintheir loyalty was aLaserHone 
Duelist for each member. Everyone knows that 


illustration by Storm Cook 


LaserHone is the best vibroweapon out there. No 
sound, nice lines and is very well-balanced. Well, 
my crew knew the value of a good weapon and 
they have never challenged me for command. 


Vibro-saw 


The vibro-saws used by workers to cut down 
the greel trees were designed by the Gree] Wood 
Logging Corporation. These saws use the same 
vibro technology used in vibroblades, and are in 
essence a more specialized version of a vibro-ax. 

Some less-than-stable individuals, such as Xe- 
non Nnaksta, choose the vibro-saw as a close- 
quarters weapon. While it is effective in this use, 
it's much better suited to cutting greel trees. 


Vibro-saw 

Model: Gree! Wood Logging Corporation Tree Felling Vibro- 

Saw 

Type: Vibro-saw 

Scale; Character 

Skill: Melee weapons 

Cost: 400 

Availability: 1, R 

Difficulty: 15 

Damage: STR+2D-+1 
Rigglen/39:4:4:51/Trie The vibro-saw is a good 
tool for cutting through bulkheads or armored 
doors, and has one benefit over other types of 
vibro-weapons: it isn’t illegal to one one. 


Zenji Needles 


Used by the enigmatic group of women known 
as the Mistryl Shadow Guards, zenji needles are 
deadly throwing weapons. They are 10 centime- 
ters long and the ends are usually decorated with 
a jewel of some type, lending to the balance and 
weight of the weapon. Usually worn as decorative 
hair ornaments, the lacquered zenji needles can 
be hurled with deadly accuracy. With sufficient 
force, zenjineedles can crack some forms of battle 
armor. 


Zenji Needles 
Model: Custom-made Mistry] zenji needles 
Type: Throwing needles 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Thrown weapons: zenji needles 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4 
Damage: STR+3D+1 when used with thrown weapons: zenji 
needles specialization, otherwise STR+1D 


Isham/37:9:3:85/Csce The only time | have ever 
seen a zenji needle was after it had been thrown at 
my head. I don’t know who had targeted me for the 
attack (or even who threw the flarging thing) but I 
spent weeks in a bacta tank healing up. The five 
other guards in the room weren't as lucky...1 was 
the only survivor of the attack. Don’t be fooled by 
the primitive appearance of the zenji needle. In 
the right hands, it is an extremely deadly weapon. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Auto-caster 

Dart Shooter 

Duo-Flechette Rifle 

Flechette Launcher 
Wrist-caster 

Neural Inhibitor 

Sevari Flash-Pistol 

Slugthrower Pistol 

Yctor Arms Black Powder Pistol 


17 
17 
17 
17 
18 
19 
19 
19 
20 


Projectile Weapons and 


Projectile Weapons 


Auto-caster 


The auto-caster is an ancient weapon designed 
for use by snipers. The repeating crossbow is very 
quiet and has excellent aim. It automatically loads 
the next quarrel into the firing groove, allowing an 
emergency second shot in case the first one does 
not hit. 


Auto-caster 
Model: Drolan Plasteel Repeating Crossbow 
Type: Crossbow 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: crossbow 
Ammo: 20 quarrels 


Cost: 700 

Availability: 1, 2 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 3-8/20/35 
: 3D 


Game Notes: Upon releasing a quarrel, the next projectile 

automatically loads into the firing groove. 
Dr. Itlar/38:3:3:29/Chae Smugglers have been 
coming up with some fair reproductions of these 
archaic weapons. Typically they try to pass them 
off to naive buyers who wouldn't know a genuine 
antique if it bit them. The original auto-casters are 
so rare, and to find one in good working condi- 
tions is practically impossible. The only one I ever 
saw demonstrated was at a special antique weapon 
show on Coruscant. Have to admit, | wanted one 
just like every other weapons nut in the crowd. 


Kolin/39: 4:2:09/Core | heard a bunch of Outer 
Rim outlaw techs have been putting together de- 
cent-quality reproductions of the auto-caster to 
arm their security grunts with. Forget collectability; 
a good weapon is a good weapon. 


Dart Shooter 


Dart shooters are the favorite weapons of con 
artists, espionage agents and anyone else who 
need to carry around weapons without anyone 
noticing. Because these weapons are spring-pow- 
ered and very small, weapons detectors seldom 
pick them up. However, their small size makes the 
darts in of themselves largely ineffective. Nor- 


Slugthrowers 


mally, the micro-sliver darts must be coated with 
stun serums, neurotoxins or other sub- 
stances to be effective. 


Dart Shooter 
Model: Typical dart shooter 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: dart 


shooter 

Ammo: 30 (per clip) 
Cost: 350 
Availability: 1, F 
Fire Rate; 4 

Range: 2-4/8/10 


Damage: Varies by Illustration by Tim Eldred 


toxin; normally 2D-6D 

stun or normal damage 
Aiden/41:1:3:95/Trae | first picked up a dart 
shooter on a job on Corellia—l had to stun a 
prominent Black Sun operative for my clients, 
who had a snatch-and-grab team nearby. | used a 
special poison that zonked out the victim immedi- 
ately and dissipated as a gas soon after. Well, it 
worked perfectly and | was smart enough to get 
off-planet with the credits before my clients de- 
cided they didn’t need me anymore. | got out just 
before the “clean-up” team fragged my position. | 
kept the dart shooter all these years to remind me 
of the good old days...and never to trust grubbers 
offering a deal too good to be true. 


Duo-Flechette Rifle 


This gun fires twin cartridges filled with sliv- 
ered shrapnel flechettes out its stubby double 
barrel. It is a powerful weapon at short range, but 
it is not terribly accurate or effective at longer 
ranges. 


Duo-Flechette Rifle 
Model: Salus DF-D1 
Type: Flechette rifle 
Skill: Armor weapons 
Ammo: 5 
Cost: 1,000 
Availability: 3, R or X 
Range: 3-10/30/60 
Damage: 5D 


Jorsk/39:8:3:21/Taae! don’t know, | mean, it's a 
great concept and all, but I have always preferred 


weapons range over innovative design concepts. 
This weapon can cause a lot of unnecessary dam- 
age and law-enforcement officials pick out the 
weapon fairly easily just because of the mess 
that’s left behind. If you’re seen carrying one, 
you'll probably get arrested immediately. As a 
matter of fact, they'll likely find a crime some- 
where in the system to blame on you. No, it’s not 
worth it. 


Prender/39:9:1:02/Llie I've heard stories of bounty 
hunters being picked up for equipping their armor 
with these weapons. Personally, [keep mine aboard 
ship in a quick-access rig near the landing ramp. 
Anybody who tries to pull a fast one during a run 
end up looking down the business end of my duo- 
flechette...for a few seconds, anyway—right up 
until I hit the trigger. 


Flechette Launcher 


Flechette launchers are portable, shoulder-fired 
weapons that fire flechette canisters, which re- 
lease scores of micro-darts in the blast area. They 
make excellent anti-personnel weapons, as they 
have the range of a rifle and the effectiveness of 
grenades. There is also armor-piercing ammuni- 
tion that can punch through heavy vehicle armor. 
Flechette canisters have computerized variable 
range settings: the shooter must determine at 
what distance the flechette canister will explode. 


illustration by Tim Eldred 


Flechette Launcher 
Model: Golon Arms FC1 Flechette Launcher 
Type: Flechette launcher 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Ammo: 6 shots per canister 
Cost: 800, 100 (anti-personnel canister), 200 (anti-vehicle 
canister) 
Availability: 2, F, R or X 
Fire Rate: 1 
Range: 5-25/100/250 
Blast Radius: ()1/3/5 
Damage: 6D/5D/3D (anti-personnel), 5D/4D/3D (speeder 
scale, anti-vehicle) 


Jorsk/37:5:5:37/Csce When | was smuggling to 
the Rebels, I had the occasion to see a flechette 
launcher in action. Sure, I've heard of them and 
know how they work, but I never had the opportu- 
nity to actually shoot one. Well, there I was, caught 
behind the Rebel line when the Imperials staged 
an ambush. They didn’t have any walkers any- 
where, but their armored ground vehicles were 
causing plenty of damage. A bunch of young Rebs 
pulled out some FCls and—after blowing off the 
door toa Chariot—just tore up the vehicle’s cabin 
with flechette rounds. Not a lot of armor-piercing 
power, but as an anti-personnel weapon, the 
flechette launcher is fearsome. 


Wrist-Caster 


The wrist-caster was designed many years ago 
as an extra assurance in self-defense. The wrist- 
caster is an arm band that fits over the forearm of 
the user. On this band is a miniature crossbow 
which aims over the back of the hand. The cross- 
bow mechanism is designed for specially made 
quarrels which fit on at a time into the prepared 
crossbow. An extra quarrel is stored along one 
side of the crossbow for easy access. The bow is 
reset after firing by a lever mechanism in the band. 


Mustration by Christina Wald 


Wrist-Caster 
Model: Drolan Plasteel QuickShot 
Type: Wrist projectile launcher 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: wrist projectile launcher 
Ammo: 2 quarrels 


Range: 1-4/10/20 

Damage: 2D+2 
Jorsk/39:4:9:28/Taa* What wrist-casters you can 
find today are usually in unusable condition. The 
crossbow mechanism is warped or the band has 
torn; it is obvious that these little weapons saw a 
lot of use in years gone by. They are quite collect- 
able, however; I've only seen one or two that 
actually fire correctly (although the aim was hor- 
ribly off). I have a friend who has just recently 
started a side-business of repairing wrist-casters 
by fixing the mechanism and making new quar- 
rels. He doesn’t get many calls for repair work, but 


what little he gets pays well and gives him feed 
money when the trade gets dry. 


Firearms and Slugthrowers 


Neural Inhibitor 


Originally popularized by hunter Merrk Nall 
(father of Gadress Nall), more and more profes- 
sionals are coming to appreciate the advantages 
of this device. At first glance, many people mis- 
take this weapon for an ordinary blaster. In actu- 
ality, it is an electromagnetic projectile launcher: 
it shoots small (6 cm long, 2 mm in diameter) 
hollow darts. Inside the dart is a small dose of a 
neurotoxin, which is injected into the target upon 
impact. The result is a quick but temporary pa- 
ralysis. Depending on the mass of the creature, 
each disruptor round can produce paralysis ef- 
fects lasting upwards of 10 minutes. Special toxins 
must be custom tailored for the physiology of 
most alien species, but the weapon is quite effec- 
tive overall. 


Neural Inhibitor 
Model: Mennotor DAS-430 Neural Inhibitor 
Type: Portable rail gun 
Scale: Character 
Skill; Firearms: rail gun 
Ammo: 240 
Cost: 5,000 (rifle), 4,000 (pistol); 750 (ammo) 
Availability: 4, R or X 
Fire Rate: 4 
Range: 3-20/50/150 (rifle), 3-10/25/50 (pistol) 
Damage: 3D+ | (from impact), 6D (stun damage from neuro- 
toxins) 


Game Notes: If the neurotoxin achieves an unconscious 
result, the victim must make a Difficult stamina roll after 
five minutes to revive. After another five minutes, the 
difficulty is reduced to Moderate. After another two min- 
utes, the difficulty to revive is Easy. Targets weighing over 
150 kilograms reduce the difficulty to revive by one level 
(Difficult becomes Moderate) and make stamina rolls at 
four minutes, three minutes and one minute; targets over 
300 kilograms reduce difficulty to revive by two levels 
(Difficult becomes Easy) and make stamina rolls at two 
minutes, one minute and one minute. 


Capt. Rislar/42:2:4:50/Core The neural inhibitor 
isn’t just for bounty hunters; it is also a recom- 


mended piece of equipment for pirates looking to 
subdue a prize with minimal casualties. 


Sevari Flash-Pistol 


On the planet of Sevarcos, the local people 
have designed an archaic weapon called the Sevari 
flash-pistol. This is due to the flying sand particles 
that become highly charged during Sevarcos’ wild 
windstorms. Energy weapons, such as blasters, 
can suffer from reduced effectiveness, dangerous 
backlashes and even power pack detonations. 


Sevari Flash-Pistol 
Model: Custom-made Sevari Flash-pistol 
Type: Archaic projectile weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Archaic guns: flash-pistol 
Ammo: | 
Cost: 50 to 500, depending on model, number of barrels, 
ornate design work, etc. 
Availability: 3 
Fire Rate: 1/2 
Range: 3-10/30/60 
Damage: 4D+2 
Game notes: If a | is rolled on the Wild Die, a premature 
detonation has occurred. Roll 1D, On a 1 or 2, the gun 
misfires and must be reloaded. On a 3 or 4 the weapon's 
barrel is damaged and must be repaired. On a 5 or 6, the 
weapon explodes, causing 4D+2 damage to the user. Flash- 
pistols with blade extensions can be used in melee combat 
with an Easy difficulty to hit. The blade does STR+1D 
damage. 


“Credman”/43:7:3:96/Rale The only reason some- 
one can have to buy one of these obsolete flash- 
pistols is if he is planning to spend a lengthy 
amount of time on Sevarcos. On any other world, 
the weaponis simply dangerous. Of course, skilled 
craftsmen can make some very intricate designs 
on the handle and barrel, so it may be worth 
something to a collector. 


Slugthrower Pistol 


The Morellian Weapons Conglomerate (MWC) 
produced this .48-caliber pistol in limited quanti- 
ties solely for the use of the Morellian Enforcers 
(hence its model designation). The weapon, though 
archaic by modern galactic standards, does an 
incredible amount of damage. Only a trained han- 
dler can properly use the weapon, as the recoil is 
enough to launch the weapon clear out of the 
shooter’s hands if not properly used. 


Slugthrower Pistol 
Model: Morellian Weapons Conglomerate .48-caliber En- 
forcer Pistol 
Type: Heavy-caliber slugthrower pistol 
Skill: Firearms: Enforcer 
Ammo: 4 
Cost: Not available for sale; 6,000+ on black market 
Availability: 4, R 
Range: 1-25/75/150 
Damage: 6D+1 
Game Notes: Second shots in a round increase the diffi- 


Illustration by LFL 


. 


aa 


ieee 


> 
K 
t 
ka 
$ 
7 
pA 
* 
¥ 


culty by one level; third shots increase the difficulty by two 

levels, etc. 
Fal’Orssk/41:1:4:58/Myre Some people scoff at 
slugthrowers, claiming the weapons are archaic, 
primitive and unable to penetrate modern armor. 
While those statements are arguably true, the 
slugthrower has one major advantage over a 
blaster: you can't silence a blaster shot. 


Bantha/41:7:3:25/Crle Slugthrower ammo can be 
modified with detonite, too; I recommend deto- 
nate tape to give a slugthrower round alittle extra 
“kick” when it impacts a target. Just make sure 
your gun’s barrel is clean and straight or else the 
round will probably explode in the chamber and 
blow your hand off. 


Yctor Arms Black Powder Pistol 


Despite being a very old, out-of-date pistol, 
many collectors still search for this weapon sim- 
ply to have it in their possession. Elegantly made 
and usually with an ornate handle, it is rather 
obsolete as a usable firearm. 


Yctor Arms Black Powder Pistol 

Model: Yctor Arms Black Powder Pistol 

Type: Black powder pistol 

Skill: Archaic guns: black powder pistol 

Ammo: | 

Cost: 200 

Availability: 4 

Range: 3/10/25 

Damage: 3D 
Holden/41:9:3:21/Bite The great thing about an 
old gun like this is that it typically doesn’t register 
on modern weapon sensors. Still, a good sniffer or 
a sharp scan tech will pick it off, but a black 
powder weapon will blow through an energy scan- 
ner with ease. 


Red/45:8:7:09/Atze Every collector I know has at 
least one of these gathering dust in his collection. 
There is one contact out in the Corporate Sector 
who practically has a monopoly on these things; 
he lives near an old battle site and just picked up 
every one he could find. It doesn’t matter if they 
work or not, so he fitted the pieces together and 
began advertising. 


Core World Arms Blast Rifle 
Pulse-wave Blaster 

Pulse-wave Rifle 

Quickdraw Pulse-wave Blaster 
Flame Carbine 

Flame Rifle 

Sound Pistol 

Sound Rifle 

Merr-Sonn B22 Hold-out Blaster 
Merr-Sonn Quickfire-4 Hold-out Blaster 
Micro Blaster 

BlasTech DL-22 Blaster Pistol 
COMPNOR Stun Blaster Pistol 
Disruptor Pistol 

Imperial Munitions KK-5 Blaster Pistol 
Imperial Munitions SC-4 Blaster Pistol 
BlasTech DL-6H Heavy Blaster Pistol 


BlasTech T-6 “Thunderer” Heavy Blaster Pistol 


Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster Pistol 
MSD-36 Heavy Disruptor Pistol 


SoroSuub “Renegade” Heavy Blaster Pistol 


BlasTech StarSlasher Blaster Carbine 
“Blast and Smash” Energy Rifle 
Blaster Speargun 

Deck-Clearing Blaster 
Deck-Sweeper 

E-11 Blaster Rifle 

E-11 Blaster Rifle (modified) 

Espo Riot Gun 

Exotac Arms Predator Blaster Rifle 
Sniper Blaster Rifle 

SoroSuub “Firelance” Blaster Rifle 
Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster Rifle 
Pulse Rifle 


Archaic Energy Weapons 


Core World Arms Blast Rifle 


This rifle is one of the original blast rifles, 
shooting short beams of concentrated light (la- 
sers) that cause severe heat damage to their 
victims. Shaped similar to today’s blaster rifles, it 
is a little longer in the barrel and tends to become 
very difficult to aim the further away the target is. 
Its power packs are no longer made, so what it has 
with it is all that is left. It should be noted, how- 
ever, that it is possible to jury rig modern-day 
power packs so they are usable. 


Core World Arms Blast Rifle 

Model: Core World Arms BR1-Z 

Type: Blast-rifle 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blast-rifle 

Ammo; 50 

Cost: 1,500 (power packs: 50) 

Availability: 4, R or X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3-15/30/150 

Damage: 5D 

Game Notes: At long range, increase difficulty by +5. 
Dr. Itlar/39:3:2:77/Chae If there’s one thing col- 
lectors want, it’s a blast rifle—the forefather of 

. blaster weapons. Blast rifles are very primitive 

compared to today’s weapons, but, stang would I 
love to get hold of a couple—one to sell off at an 
extravagant price and one to keep for myself. 


Prishella/39:8:2:09/Csce During a data slice into 
some NRI files (no applause please, just toss some 
credits), | ran across some records about Kathol 
Sector; apparently there's a fairly low-tech culture 
out there that still manufactures these babies. 
Might be worth a look.... 


Pulse-wave Blaster 


Pulse-wave blasters were the precursors to 
modern energy weapons; they fired a packet of 
coherent energy that inflicted considerable dam- 
age to a target. Pulse-wave weapons operated 
much like disruptor weapons, causing the target's 
molecules to separate. Although those pulse-wave 
blasters found today are ancient, many still work 
well enough and have been banned by most worlds. 


Energy Weapons 


Ilustration by Christina Waid 


Pulse-wave Blaster 

Model: Greff-Timms Industrial ATA Pulse-wave Blaster 

Type: Blaster: Pulse-wave blaster 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Pulse-wave weapons: blaster 

Ammo: 50 

Cost: 600 (power packs: 35) 

Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3-8/20/100 

Damage: 4D 
Meydhu/40:3:4:54/Klue The pulse-wave blaster— 
the forerunner to the modern blaster—is virtually 
extinct. I've run into some worlds in the Outer Rim 
Territories where the natives are happy to get any 
kind of high-tech, no matter how primitive. There's 
good money to be made selling these archaic 
weapons to a bunch of nuclear-level warmongers. 


Pulse-wave Rifle 


The pulse wave rifle was created soon after the 
pulse-wave blaster. It was designed to give range 
and more strength to the firepower. 


Pulse-wave Rifle 
Model: Greff-Timms Industrial Type A pulse-wave rifle 
Type: Blaster rifle 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Pulse-wave weapons: rifle 
Ammo: 50 
Cost: 2,000 (power packs: 50) 
Availability: 4, X 
Fire Rate: | 
Range: 3-20/75/150 
Damage: 5D 


Triundel/40:4:9:23/Atze The old pulse-wave blast- 
ers make for an interesting hunting weapon. They 
arecranky, temperamental, hard to aim and blasted 
heavy, but they make a very satisfying “thud” 
when discharged. 


Gintwin/41:1:7:51/Azoe | don’t recommend fir- 
ing vintage pulse-wave rifles. I ran across a crate of 
them a while back and discovered that the metal 
they were constructed from had fatigued...badly. 
Check around the power cell housings for 
microfractures and triple-check the barrel for warps 
and micro-corrosion if you try and fire an older 
weapon. Otherwise, don't be surprised when it up 
and explodes in your hand. 


Quick-draw Pulse-wave Blaster 


The SnapShoot DT3 was favored by officers in 
the Old Republic military. Small, sleek and deadly 
enough for its day, the DT3 was designed to be 
drawn and fired quickly, though its low ammo 
capacity made it an impractical close-support or 
infantry weapon. 


Quick-draw Pulse-wave Blaster 

Model: Greff-Timms SnapShoot DT3 

Type: Quick-draw pulse-wave blaster 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Pulse-wave weapons: quick-draw blaster 

Ammo: 3 

Cost: 300 (power packs: 20) 

Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 2-3/6/10 

Damage: 3D 

Game Notes: The quick-draw feature of this weapon allows 

a character to draw and fire in one round without a multi- 

action penalty. 
Giamel/42:3:8:39/Csce Back over on Nar Shaddaa, 
there was a gang of punks who were challenging 
everyone they could find to quick-draw duels. 
What they didn’t mention was that while thieving 
in the city, they came across a small batch of 
SnapShoot DT3’s, ancient blasters that give an 
edge to the duel. Needless to say, someone finally 
got suspicious of their winnings and figured out 
the cause. The group of boys disappeared soon 
after, as well as the SnapShoot blasters. 


Flame Projection and Sonic 
Weapons 


Flame Carbine 


Solid, rugged and reliable, the flame carbine 
rarely malfunctions. Due to its large barrel design, 
it’s really hard not to miss a target, although its 
short range neutralizes that advantage. 


Flame Carbine 

Model: Authority Flame Carbine 

Type: Flame projector 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Flame-thrower 

Ammo: 10 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: 1/2 

Range: 3—4/5/7 

Damage: 5D (first round, 3D for next five rounds unless 

extinguished) 
Trenton/40:3:5:84/Kuae This is nota bad weapon, 
nor is it a great weapon; | think it makes a decent 
secondary that you keep on your back until neces- 
sary. Because of the carbine design, it’s reliable 
and can definitely hold off an attack long enough 
to come up with a better plan. Still, you better 
think of something quick; it spends ammo quickly. 


Flame Rifle 


The flame rifle differs from the flame carbine in 
that it has a narrower nozzle, which gives the 
flame a longer range and more force. On the flip 
side, it has to be reloaded more often. 


Flame Rifle 
Model: Authority Flame Rifle 
Type: Flame projector 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Flame-thrower 
Ammo: 25 
Cost: 700 
Availability: 4, X 
Fire Rate: 1/2 


ese 


ern 
x 


-A 
D 
= 
s 
3 
* 
i 


F Éj 


Range: 3-5/7/10 
Damage: 5D+1 (first round, 4D for next 10 rounds unless 
extinguished), 
Giamel/39:2:9:74/Csce The flame rifle is a fear- 
some weapon. Oh, blaster bolts and energy weap- 
ons are nothing to scoff at, but the idea that 
someone can set me on fire scares the flarg out of 
me far worse than someone pointing a blaster my 
way. 


Sound Pistol 


The sound pistol can be calibrated for a num- 
ber of effects: a sonic blast which causes damage 
in a manner similar to other energy weapons, or 
sonic stun, which releases a piercing wail that 
debilitates targets (this attack form 
only causes stun damage). All tar- 
gets inthe blast cone are affected. 
The second setting can be dif- 
ficult to use because not all 
frequencies affect all beings 
the same way: the weap- 
ons must often be re- 
calibrated for different 
species. 


Sound Pistol 
Model: SonoMax 
75 

Type: Riot con- 
trol weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: 
sound pistol 
Ammo: 20 

Cost: Not avail- 
able to the public 
Fire Rate: 2 
Range: 0-3 (cone 
is 0.5 meters 
wide)/10 (cone is 
1.5 meters wide)/20 (cone is 3 meters wide) 

Damage: 6D/5D/4D or 5D/4D/3D (stun)—damage corre- 
sponds to range 


Trenton/37:9:3:83/Cree This is actually an effec- 
tive weapon. It’s really useful when you have to 
clear a path through an angry mob. It’s light and 
small so people do not see you are armed until it's 
too late. I've heard many people mention that this 
is an ineffective, silly weapon when compared 
with more common energy weapons, but trust 
me—this weapon can knock you off your feet if 
you're facing the blast. 


Illustration by 
Tim Eldred 


Sound Rifle 


The sound rifle can be calibrated for a number 
of effects: a sonic blast, which causes damage ina 
manner similar to other energy weapons, or sonic 
stun, which releases a piercing wail that debili- 
tates targets (this attack form only causes stun 
damage). All targets in the blast cone are affected. 
The second setting can be difficult to use because 


not all frequencies affect all beings the same way: 
the weapons must often be re-calibrated for differ- 
ent species. 


Sound Rifle 

Model: SonoMax 100 

Type: Riot control weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: sound rifle 

Ammo: 60 

Cost: Not available to the public 

Fire Rate: 2 

Range: 0-5 (cone is 0.5 meters wide)/15 (cone is 1.5 meters 

wide)/30 (cone is 3 meters wide) 

Damage: 6D/5D/4D or 5D/4D/3D (stun)—damage corre- 

sponds to range 
Yideg/38:2:2:47/Nar* The sound rifle has always 
been a superior weapon in my mind, ever since | 
used one to remove a few guests at a party. They 
were two bounty hunters disguised as alien digni- 
taries, waiting to get a chance to snag my em- 
ployer and bring him to the Imperials. Well, | 
caught a flash of metal under the “costume” of one 
of the “dignitaries"—the imbecile still had his 
armor on. | didn't hesitate, I just cut loose with a 
shot from my sound rifle before they could even 
draw their weapons. Sure enough, they were armed 
to the teeth with all sorts of restraints and stun 
weapons, I got a pretty good bonus that day. 


Hold-out Blasters 


Merr-Sonn B22 Hold-out Blaster 


This is one of the smallest hold-out blasters 
ever to be created. Designed to hide almost any- 
where, Merr-Sonn expanded on their original hold- 
out blaster design and created B22 after Imperial 
authority “requested” it. Not only is it an easily 
concealable blaster, but the custom-designed 
power cells have a bit more energy than the 
previous version, providing more ammo in the 
same size. 


Merr-Sonn B22 Hold-out Blaster 
Model: Merr-Sonn B22 Hold-Out Blaster 
Type: Concealable blaster 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: hold-out blaster 
Ammo: 10 
Cost: 300 (power packs: 25) 
Availability: 2, R or X 
Fire Rate: | 
Range: 3-4/8/12 
Damage: 3D 


lliustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Dykara/41:8:3:93/Crle The B22 is definitely a 
small, easy-to-conceal blaster, but don’t let the 
weapon's “dainty” appearance fool you—it is 
deadly in the right hands. 

Llona/42:3:1:76/Csce I've seen these things in the 
hands of Black Sun remnants and others who 
specialize in contract murder. Personally, I pack 
one simply for self-defense. In all honesty, this 
little blaster is useless in a prolonged fight, but it 
can give you the element of surprise and give you 
an opportunity to escape. 


Merr-Sonn Quickfire-4 Hold-out 
Blaster 


One of the most powerful hold-out blasters 
ever made, the Quickfire is used mostly by crimi- 
nals of all kinds, Easily concealed on one’s person, 
the blaster is capable of doing as much damage as 
an average blaster pistol. Not surprisingly, the 
Quickfire is illegal in most areas of the galaxy. 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Merr-Sonn Quickfire-4 Hold-Out Blaster 
Model: Merr-Sonn Quickfire-4 Hold-Out Blaster 
Type: Hold-out blaster 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: hold-out blaster 

Ammo: |() 

Cost: 300 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 2, R or X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 34/8/12 

Damage: 4D 


Jorsk/37:7:4:94/Adae Merr-Sonn wasn’t fooling 
around when it developed the Quickfire-4. It is just 
as dangerous as any blaster pistol and is far better 
than most hold-outs. The people who use these 
blasters are usually owners of disreputable estab- 
lishments who know that, sooner or later, things 
will get rough. 


Mallaggi/37:7:9:01/Hole There’s one problem with 
the Quickfire-4: the front sight. The sight profile 
on the front of the weapon is higher than is neces- 
sary for such a close-combat gun, and it can snag 
on clothing or concealed holsters. Shaving the 
sight down (or off) may reduce your ability to 
carefully aim the weapon, but it will also reduce 
your chances of fumbling in a pocket while some 
grubber draws a bead on you. 


Micro Blaster 


Micro blasters come in all shapes and sizes, 
and—despite their appearance—are far from toys. 
The only difference between a tiny, two-shot mi- 
cro and a full-size blaster pistol is the damage it 
causes. Micros have but one purpose—to give the 
user one slim chance of escape in a desperate 
situation. 

Useless in a prolonged firefight or at any range 
longer than five meters, micros are for prudent 
individuals who do not wish to be completely 
unarmed (but don't want to bother with heavier 
weapons, either). Their small size makes them 
quite hard to find—because of their tiny power 
packs, weapons detectors also have an increased 
difficulty trying to locate them. 


Mustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Micro Blaster 
Model: Gee-Tech 12 Defender 
Type: Micro blaster 
Scale: Character 
Ammo: 2 
Cost: 200-400 (power pack: 10) 
Availability: 2, R or X 
Fire Rate: | 
Range: l-5/no effect at further ranges 


Damage: 2D+2 

Game Notes: Very Difficult search skill roll required for 

characters and weapon detectors to find a micro blaster. 
Meydhu/40:3:2:29/Crle More than once, | ran into 
some rich, arrogant grubber who had one of these 
micro blasters stuck somewhere in their fancy 
clothes. Once, awealthy passenger—some grekkin’ 
noble from Tapani, no less—grabbed me and 
placed his micro to my head. My crew promptly 
stunned him. He spent the next week in our brig— 
being laughed at, naturally—until his family paid 
the exorbitantly high ransom we demanded. 


Nadri/40:7:7:34/Gele Don’t underestimate a good 
micro blaster. I saw a gunman in the Parmic region 
get vaped by a rookie kid. The kid had a BlasTech 
DL-18 on his hip, so the gunman assumed the kid 
was going to dip for it during the fight. Instead, the 
kid spun and drew a micro blaster from a wrist 
holster and put a bolt into his opponent (who was 
busy shooting at where the kid would have been 
standing if he’d drawn his -18). If you are at close 
range and know what you're doing, a micro blaster 
is a pretty nasty weapon. 


Blaster Pistols 


BlasTech DL-22 Blaster Pistol 


Like its predecessor, the DL-18, the DL-22 is a 
sturdy blaster pistol that can be found practically 
everywhere, BlasTech created the DL-22 in re- 
sponse to Merr-Sonn’s DD6, thus beginning the 
infamous “blaster wars,” where several different 
companies began to vie for the unofficial title of 
“blaster king.” The DL-22 is essentially similar to 
the DL-18, with a little extra firepower. 


BlasTech DL-22 Blaster Pistol 

Model: BlasTech DL-22 

Type: Blaster Pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: blaster pistol 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 1, F, R, or X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3-10/30/120 

Damage: 4D-+1 
Giamel/39:2:6:89/Csce For all the hype BlasTech 
threw out at us, the DL-22 wasn't that much differ- 
ent from the DL-18. Still, it had better focusing 
crystals in the barrel so the -22 inflicts a bit more 


Ay 


(i ==, 
es 


4 


Wustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


damage. | think BlasTech was so surprised that 
Merr-Sonn made a better blaster than them, they 
felt they had to one-up them. 


Tromig/41:7:2:11/Nare Actually, the -22 lends it- 
self to modification better than the -18. I added a 
good night scope, a better power cell port and 
even managed to rig a diagnostic chip into the 
butt-plate; now my astromech droid has no prob- 
lems running maintenance checks on it. 


COMPNOR Stun Blaster Pistol 


This non-lethal weapon was given to the elite 
members of the COMPNOR SAGroup Troops to 
allow them to feel “important” and win their loy- 
alty for the Empire. The head of each troop could 
receive one after proving his loyalty. While this 
blaster is not much use in combat, it can be used 
for protection or for disciplining platoon mem- 
bers. 


COMPNOR Stun Blaster Pistol 

Model: COMPNOR stun blaster 

Type: Stun blaster 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster 

Ammo: 10 

Cost: 300 

Availability: 2, F or R 

Range: 3-10/30/60 

Damage: 2D (stun) 
Tretlin/35:5:7:14/Vode The COMPNOR stun pis- 
tol is not very effective: it’s really weak, even for a 
stun blaster. It is perfect for frightening away 
burglars and unwanted creatures if you're a paci- 
fist, but can also be used to prevent a criminal 
from escaping or discipline an unruly character. 


Disruptor Pistol 


The older disruptors were designed to do a 
lethal amount of damage. An energy weapon, a 
disruptor works by breaking down objects at a 
molecular level. Any matter subjected to a 
disruptor is quickly and violently disintegrated. 
Disruptors are outlawed almost everywhere, and 
are typically of crude manufacture, often con- 
structed by outlaw techs for various less-than- 
savory purposes. They have a short range and 
quickly drain their power cells. They are imprac- 
tical for military purposes, and are instead fa- 
vored by those who prefer killing; they are popu- 
lar with terrorists and pirates, 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Disruptor Pistol 
Model: Standard disruptor pistol 
Type: Anti-personnel weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: disruptor 
Ammo: 5 


Cost: 3,000 (power packs: 50) 
Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: ()-3/5/7 

Damage: 6D+2 


Meydhu/39:7:3:26/Bese I’m not sure if there's a 
nastier weapon out there than a disruptor. The 
idea of shooting someone and causing there mol- 
ecules to fall apart is just, well, creepy. The only 
people who use this type of disintegrator are sick- 
minded psychopaths who make a bad name for 
pirates everywhere. 


Ulmac/39:7:3:72/Gare | don’t know, | kind of like 
disruptors. Shoot a nearby object with it and it 
tells people that you mean business; they'll throw 
down their weapons and do whatever you say. If 
someone doesn't take that warning, well, he de- 
serves what he gets. 


Imperial Munitions KK-5 Blaster Pistol 


This was the most common sidearm in the 
Imperial Forces. All soldiers were issued these 
small but efficient weapons in order to better 
protect the Empire. Similar to the BlasTech DL-18, 
the Imperial Munitions insists the KK-5 is the 
better weapon. Today, it is rapidly becoming dif- 
ficult to find any Imperial Munitions weaponry, 
thus the price has begun to climb. 


Imperial Munitions KK-5 Blaster Pistol 
Model: Imperial Munitions KK-5 Blaster Pistol 
Type: Blaster pistol 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: blaster pistol 
Ammo: 100 
Cost: 750 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: R, X 
Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3—10/30/120 
Damage: 4D 


Ulmac/44:1:4:27/Nare | always felt that the blaster 
pistol the Imperials used had the same problem 
the rest of their blasters had—you can’t aim them 
worth a scrag. | even had one of my sharpshooter 
buddies check one out; he shot it ten times and 
missed the target eight of those times. He couldn't 
believe it, he’d re-adjust his aim just slightly and 
the next shot would be completely off. 


Gunman/45:3:0:00/Elre Actually, a whole run of 
KK-5s were released to the military with defective 
prismatic crystals. They were cloudy and smudged 
and when the blaster gasses were activated, it 
could throw off the accuracy by as much as 20 
percent. A new high-grade prismatic crystal is 
cheap enough to obtain and can improve the 
weapon’s performance considerably. 


Imperial Munitions SC-4 Blaster Pistol 


The SC4 blaster pistol is a special pistol once 
sold by Imperial Munitions to “important” citizens 
of the Empire who need “extra” protection. While 
itis perfectly usable as a blaster pistol, inside both 


its handle and its power packs are special codes 
easily traceable by the Empire's computers. There- 
fore, when the weapon is used in the process of 
committing any crime, Imperial officers can find 
the user with little difficulty. 


Imperial Munitions SC-4 Blaster Pistol 
Model: Imperial Munitions SC-4 Blaster Pistol 
Type: Blaster pistol 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: blaster pistol 
Ammo; 50 
Cost: 750 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: F, R or X 
Fire Rate: 1 

Range: 3-10/30/120 
Damage: 4D 


Wustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Darry/40:8:4:31/Umge | knew a bounty hunter 
who was given one of these pistols as a “reward” 
for services well-rendered. He thought it was a 
really great gift, until he took down the wrong 
mark with it. Next thing he knows, he’s arrested by 
Imperials and forced to do the Empire's dirty work 
to pay them off and avoid a quick, nasty hop to 
Kessel. SC-4s are often modified with an explosive 
in the pistol-grip. A specific transmission—coded 
for Imperial use—sets the micro-charge off, de- 
stroying the weapon and probably shattering the 
shooter's hand in the process. The Imperials let a 
crate of these pistols fall into the hands of a Rebel 
cell with predictable results. 


Heavy Blaster Pistols 
BlasTech DL-6H Heavy Blaster Pistol 


BlasTech was able to finally make a heavy 
blaster pistol that not only gave the user the 
firepower of a standard heavy blaster pistol, but 
also the range of a BlasTech DL-18. It is only a bit 
larger than the standard pistol frame, making the 
pistol easy to disguise. The weapon is illegal or 
heavily restricted in many systems. 


i+ 


- 
r 
_ 
= 
” 
> 
= 
t 
> 
= 
= 


y i aa ma = 


P iye « 
o 
ELLIT ET 


BlasTech DL-6H Heavy Blaster Pistol 

Model: BlasTech DL-6H Heavy Blaster Pistol 

Type: Heavy blaster pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: heavy blaster pistol 

Ammo: 25 

Cost: 800 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 1, F, R, or X 

Range: 3-10/30/120 

Damage: 5D 
Yideg/40:8:9:06/Lia* | was one of the first in line 
when BlasTech introduced its DL-6H. | was so 
eager to get a hold of a heavy blaster that I didn't 
have to jury-rig to give myself a longer range. It 
definitely was a lot better than I expected. Double 
the range, with the weight and feel of a heavy 
blaster pistol. | ended buying the first six pieces 
my weapons seller offered. 


Tellar/41:6:1:99/Els* There's a custom weapons 
tech in the Outer Rim (last seen at Margath’s on 
Elshandruu Pica) who is offering to modify the 
power cell housing on the -6H. He claims he can 
give the weapon the capacity for an additional 20 
shots. 


BlasTech T-6 “Thunderer” Heavy 
Blaster Pistol 


After SoroSuub came up with their Renegade, 
advertised as the most powerful heavy blaster 
pistol on the market, BlasTech began a mission to 
beat that record. What they came up with was the 
Thunderer. Though extremely bulky and heavy, 
the Thunderer remains just under the size limit to 
still be considereda pistol. When BlasTech proudly 
demonstrated the Thunderer for the first time, 
both Merr-Sonn and SoroSuub ceded the victory 
to BlasTech, “king of the blaster wars.” 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


BlasTech T-6 “Thunderer” Heavy Blaster 


Pistol 
Model: BlasTech T-6 “Thunderer” Heavy Blaster Pistol 
Type: Heavy blaster pistol 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: heavy blaster pistol 
Ammo: 25 
Cost: 750 (power packs: 25) 


Availability: 2, R or X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3-7/25/50 

Damage: 6D+2 
Capt. Rislar/39:9:3:12/Stee The BlasTech 
Thunderer is my favorite weapon. Sure, it’s a little 
bulky, but it can blow holes through things with 
minimal kick-back. It does more damage than any 
other blaster out there. 


Al’dindra/39:9:9:02/Hape The “Thunderer” is an 
impressive weapon, all right. Be careful, though: 
the barrel isn't quite up to the power levels it can 
dish out. I’ve heard about barrels warping during 
firefights because the shooter didn’t have time to 
allow the weapon to cool. The prismatic crystals 
mis-align from the barrel and...boom. 


Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster 
Pistol 


A standard weapon of the Imperial Forces, the 
heavy blaster pistol packs a large amount of fire- 
power inasmall package. Resembling the BlasTech 
DL-44 design, the Imperial Munitions heavy blaster 
pistol is capable of more damage without losing 
any more range. Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster 
Pistol 

Model: Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster Pistol 

Type: Heavy blaster pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: heavy blaster pistol 

Ammo: 25 

Cost: 1,250 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: R, X 

Range: 3-7/25/50 

Damage: 5D+1 
Red/42:4:9:73/Reue The Imperials created a pretty 
decent heavy blaster pistol. They stole the DL-44 
design—for the obvious reason that the DL-44 is 
an excellent weapon—but they squeezed out just 
a bit more power from their version. Because it is 
the last heavy blaster pistol Imperial Munitions 
made before going out of business, it has become 
highly collectible. 


MSD-36 Heavy Disrupter Pistol 


Soon after Merr-Sonn developed the MSD-32, 
Merr-Sonn was pressured to develop a stronger 
energy weapon, capable of more damage. Like the 
MSD-32, the disruptor works by breaking down 
objects at a molecular level. They have a short 
range and quickly drain their power cells, but 
almost guarantee lethal results. Disruptors are 
outlawed almost everywhere and are typically 
seen only in the hands of terrorists and pirates. 


Heavy Disrupter Pistol 
Model: Merr-Sonn MSD-36 Heavy Disruptor Pistol 
Type: Anti-personnel weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: heavy disruptor 
Ammo: 10 


Cost: 6,000 

Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: ()-3/5/7 

Damage: 6D 
Yiggott/39:6:1:08/Cale These weapons are pow- 
erful. At close range they can stop a charging, 
angry Wookiee. Just be prepared for the kick, and 
the flash-heat from the barrel. | burned by hands 
very badly when I tried to holster my MSD-36 after 
firing it. 


SoroSuub “Renegade” Heavy Blaster 
Pistol 


SoroSuub held top spot for quite a while in the 
“blaster wars” with their blaster known as the 
Renegade. Considered the strongest heavy blaster 
pistol of its time, pirates and smugglers fought 
over each other, everyone wanting to be the first 
to own one. Today, it’s still considered an impres- 
sive blaster and remains one of the most popular 
heavy blasters available. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


SoroSuub “Renegade” Heavy Blaster 
Pistol 

Model: SoroSuub “Renegade” Heavy Blaster Pistol 

Type: Heavy blaster pistol 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: Heavy blaster pistol 

Ammo: 25 

Cost: 750 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 2, R or X 

Range: 3-7/25/50 

Damage: 5D+2 
Aiden/40:8:4:89/Tale SoroSuub’s Renegade is a 
really nice piece of weaponry—the strongest heavy 
blaster they ever made. | liked it a lot; it’s comfort- 
able, fairly lightweight and it has excellent factory 
sights. In a way, l like the power of this blaster over 
the power of BlasTech’s Thunderer. Sure, it’s not 
as strong, but it isn’t as bulky, either. What good 
is massive blaster power if the gun is too big to aim 
properly? 


Blaster Carbines 


BlasTech StarSlasher Blaster Carbine 


Carbines are older, shorter and less accurate 
than blaster rifles. Blaster carbines are notori- 


ously reliable and have been known to last for 
years with minimal maintenance. Some carbines 
have a scope (reduce long-range shots to medium 
range), shoulder-sling, bipod (+1D to hit when 
aiming for more than one round), and folding 
bayonet (does STR+1D+2 damage). 


BlasTech StarSlasher Blaster Carbine 

Model: BlasTech StarSlasher Blaster Carbine 

Type: Blaster Carbine 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster; blaster carbine 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 900 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 2, X (in the Authority) 

Range: 3-25/50/250* 

* At long range, increase difficulty by +5 

Damage: 5D 
Jorsk/40:6:2:20/Taae Even though it’s one of the 
oldest working models in the galaxy, I still love my 
StarSlasher. I got her as a present from my father 
when he retired from smuggling long before the 
Battle at Yavin. Just a couple weeks ago, I gave the 
StarSlasher to my son while we were on a hunting 
trip. I couldn't believe how well it still works, even 
though its been stuffed in a storage crate in my 
freighter hold for the last decade. (Even the sights 
were still adjusted properly.) 


Blaster Rifles 


“Blast and Smash” Energy Rifle 


Intimidating is the best word to describe this 
weapon. A Prax over-under, twin-barreled weapon, 
it mates a Drearian rapid-fire blaster rifle (top) 
with a modified Locris micro-grenade launcher 
underneath. 

The result is a direct-fire weapon with a variety 
of explosive ordinance in one convenient pack- 
age. It is perfect for those situations where hunt- 
ers will have to force their way through a variety 
of “minions” before reaching the acquisition. A 
separate bipod can be attached to increase accu- 
racy at long distances. 


Illustration by David Plunkett 


“Blast and Smash” Energy Rifle 
Model: Prax Arms Model AXM-50 “Blast and Smash” 
Type: Blaster rifle and micro-grenade launcher 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: blaster rifle (for blaster rifle); missile weap- 
ons: micro-grenade launcher (for grenade launcher) 
Ammo: 250 (blaster), 30 (micro-grenade magazine) 

Cost: 4,500; 250 (bi-pod); 1,000 (micro-grenade magazine), 


power pack (100) or power pack generator (500) 
Availability: 3, F or R 

Fire Rate: 7 (blaster); 1 (micro-grenade launcher) 

Range: 3-25/50/75 (blaster rifle), 5-25/100/200 (micro-gre- 
nade launcher) 

Blast Radius: 0-2/4/6 (micro-grenade launcher) 

Damage: 5D (blaster rifle), 4D/3D/2D (micro-grenade 
launcher) 


Game Notes: This micro-grenade launcher has a computer- 
ized fire control system. If the character can make a Mod- 
erate Perception roll (this is a free action and doesn’t count 
as a skill use, so there are no penalties), the character can 
add +1D to hit when the weapon is fired; if the character is 
firing at the same target repeatedly, the character auto- 
matically gets the +1D for the second and following shots. 
Use of the bi-pod adds +1D to the blaster roll. 


Darry/41:6:2:17/Umge One of the first weapons | 
wanted (okay, okay, coveted) when | began bounty 
hunting was a Prax “Blast and Smash.” These guns 
are the best weapon to be carrying when you walk 
into a cantina looking for your mark. Just seeing 
me wearing it made the crowd scatter. These days, 
it hangs over the bar at my tavern, just within 
arms’ reach. Hopefully it'll discourage guys like 
me from starting any firefights in my bar. 


Blaster Speargun 


A blaster speargun is a long metal pipe which 
shoots a small spear through water or air, often as 
far as 50 meters. Asmall blaster is slung under the 
spear barrel, which shoots a concentrated blue 
beam. The speargun only carries one shot at a 
time, though clips are mounted along the side of 
the weapon to hold two more. Additional spears 
can be carried on the user’s person in a quiver. 


Blaster Speargun 
Model: BlasTech Firearc 49 Speargun 
Type: Blaster speargun 
Skill: Blaster rifle 
Ammo: Speargun: 3 spears (one loaded, two side-mounted); 
blaster: 50 


Cost: 300 

Availability: 2, R or X 

Fire Rate: Speargun: 1/3; blaster: 1 

Range: Speargun: 3-7/25/50; blaster 3-20/30/45 

Damage: Spear damage 4D/2D/1D; blaster damage 5D/4D/ 

3D+1 (damages by range) 

Game Notes: Above stats do not reflect usual underwater 

damage and skill penalties. 
Lloda/43:3:9:21/Kote I was surprised at how well 
the speargun functions out of water. It actually 
has comparable range to its underwater specs, 
and has some serious intimidation value. 


War’'qi/45:3:9:13/Bote This is one intense weapon 
for hunting. The blaster is perfect for bringing 
down your prey, but when you want to truly 
experience the thrill ofthe hunt, ignore the blaster 
and start hunting with the speargun. It’s not as 
powerful, and you can't just start shooting know- 
ing sooner or later, you'll hit. With the speargun 
you get one shot before you have to reload. There's 
nothing like facing down a ghest in the swamps of 
Rodia and knowing you have one shot to put it 
down. Now that’s fun! 


Tellar/45:5:2:33/Tate This weapon has a reputa- 
tion for being a great hunting weapon, but for 
more combat-oriented operations, it also makes 
an excellent explosives-delivery device. | rigged 
up the speartip with detonite tape and an impact 
fuse and blasted clean through an armored for- 
tress gate (to an underwater garrison no less) with 
one shot. Noisy, but effective. 


Deck-Clearing Blaster 


Blasters remain in regular use among raiders: 
pirates often kill their way to a ship's controls, and 
privateers must often meet lethal resistance with 
stronger weapons than stunners. This blaster, 
however, is designed to hit as many targets as 
possible. 

It is interesting to note that the Empire has 
rejected the DL-87 for Naval use; most Imperial 
commanders believe that the unit's range is too 
short for most Naval operations and that its slow 
rate of fire and bulky size make it impractical for 
use by armored marines or stormtroopers. 


Deck-Clearing Blaster 

Model: BlasTech Firespray DL-87 

Type: Wide-field blaster 

Skill: Blast: deck clearer 

Ammo: 10 

Cost: 100 — packs; 25) 

Availability: 2, 

Fire Rate: 1/2 

Range: 1/5/10 meters 

Damage: 5D 

Game Notes: Everyone within a 45 degree arc of the shooter's 

front is hit with a successful use. Characters within five 

meters of the blast cannot attempt to dodge; characters six 

to ten meters away may attempt to dodge, though all 

attempts are at a -1D penalty. 
Capt. Rislar/38:5:4:03/Mone Using this blaster is 
like shooting quellfish in a barrel. | don’t think 
there is another blaster out there that just takes 
out as many targets as this one does. Imperial 
command told us that the deck-clearer was not 
effective “due to its low rate of fire.” Clearly, the 
upper ranks never faced down a maniacal pirate 
boarding crew armed with these weapons. When 
| commanded a small customs cutter, a pirate 
punched a deck-clearer shot through the airlock. 
Half my crew was killed when the atmosphere 
vented into space, and most of the rest were 
vaped by the raiders. 


Qellrin/38:6:1:12/Chae Actually, I've found most 
of the morons that run around with deck-clearers 
rely on the weapon's fire arc to make up for their 
lack of brains. When I got jumped by pirates off 
Q’mara, | rigged up some portable shield genera- 
tors and simply let the lead pirate waste his first 
shot with the deck-clearer. Since they have sucha 
slow rate of fire, it took us no time to seize him, his 
weapon...and the rest of the boarding party. 


Mustration by Storm Cook 


Deck-Sweeper 


This stunner is intended for neutralizing large 
numbers of people at close range and is sold 
exclusively to legitimate police forces and militar- 
ies (particularly for use by customs boarding 
parties and riot police). Possession by unautho- 
rized civilians is illegal. 

Like the DL-87, the deck-sweeper was rejected 
by the Imperial Navy for its slow rate of fire and 
limited ammunition capacity. 


Deck-Sweeper 
Model: Merr-Sonn Deck Sweeper Stunning Blaster 
Type: Stunner 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: deck-sweeper 
Ammo: 5 
Cost: 500 (power packs: 10) 
Availability: 2, X 
Fire Rate: 1/2 
Range: 3/5/10 
Damage: 6D 
Game Notes: Everyone within a 45-degree arc of the 
shooter's front is hit with a successful use. Characters 
within five meters of the blast cannot attempt to dodge; 
characters six to ten meters away may attempt to dodge, 
though all attempts are at a -1D penalty. 


Meydhu/39:9:3:20/Tate Merr-Sonn was catering 
specifically to pirates when they came up with 
this baby. (Though it is also suited for law-en- 
forcement use, as well; boarding parties 
beware...CorSec has started using em.) One deck- 
sweeper in the hands of a good crew can make 
taking prizes just so much easier. My crew got a 
hold of one at StarForge and were able to take out 
several crews without a fight. We only lost it when 


our lead boarder was caught in an explosion while 
using it. | was willing to go back and retrieve the 
weapon, but the captain pulled me out. | miss that 
stunner. 


E-11 Blaster Rifle 


Similar to the standard issue stormtrooper 
weapon, the E-11 is also popular with Espo assault 
squads. The Espos use the E-11 for a particularly 
brutal form of torture called “The Burning,” which 
involves setting the weapon on a very low power 
level and searing the flesh on the torture subject. 


E-11 Blaster Rifle 

Model: BlasTech E-11 Military Issue Blaster Rifle 

Scale: Character 

Skill; Blaster: blaster rifle 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 1,000 (power packs: 25) 

Range: 3—30/100/300 

Damage: 5D 
Fotakex/44:8:5:27/Ette The BlasTech E-11—the 
design which was stolen to make the Stormtrooper 
One blaster rifle—was a favorite of smugglers in 
my day; seems like everyone and their mother had 
at least one hidden away. BlasTech stopped mak- 
ing 'em, supposedly after they found out some 
secondary companies were modifying them and 
adding aslug-thrower tothe barrel. (Oddly enough, 
this “discovery” took place shortly after the Battle 
of Endor. Looks to me like they didn’t want to keep 
making an Imperial-designed weapon and risk 
angering the New Republic.) These days, the only 
place you'll see a decent E-11 is in someone's 
private collection. 


Tillin’natiri/45:4:8:91/Orde Actually, a number 
of associates of mine used to have a sweet scam 
where they'd pose as stormtroopers and “confis- 
cate contraband” from other smugglers. Worked 
really well until one of our targets twigged to the 
fact that we were using E-lls instead of 
Stormtrooper-Ones. 


Garnet/45:4:9:09/Els* That was you? 1 remember 
you punks very well. If I were you, I'd get off Ord 
Mantell; I'll be looking for you, grubber. (Got to 
hand it to you, though...it was a good con.) 


E-11 Blaster Rifle (Modified) 


The BiasTech E-11/S blaster rifle and slug- 
thrower combination is a custom-designed weapon 
with a very limited audience. Secondary after- 
market manufacturers have equipped a standard 
E-11 blaster rifle with a slug-throwing rifle. The 
weapon has limited utility—after all, the projec- 
tile rifle is not as effective as a standard blaster 
and dueto the rarity of projectile weapons, ammu- 
nition tends to be expensive. In fact, the weapon is 
a prime choice of those who need the unique 
flexibility that an energy and projectile combina- 


Dykara/41:7:5:25/Teye | like the modified version 
of the E-11/S. The combination of slugthrower and 
blaster is pretty handy, especially if you are firing 
from cover. | managed to convince a squad of 
stormtroopers that they were being fired at by 
two people instead of one. 


Espo Riot Gun 
Riot guns are two-handed, short-barreled com- 
pact blaster rifles. They have a large ammo capac- 
ity, but aren't particularly accurate. Espos often 
use them on constant-fire mode. 


Espo Riot Gun 
Model: BlasTech 500 Riot Gun 


Illustration by Tim Eldred 


Type: Riot Gun 
tion offers—a combination perfectly suited to Scale: Character 
defeating reinforced building or repulsorcraft Skill: Blaster: riot gun 
structures. As such, the weapon is a prime choice Pern on 
E for assassins and others who rely on quick terror- Availability: 2, R 
EN ist attacks to accomplish their ends. Range: 3-30/100/300 
ee The weapon is largely outlawed throughout Damage: 5D+1 
7 


most of the “civilized” galaxy, requiring potential 
buyers to deal with the black market. Since the 
weapon has only one trigger, most E-11/Ss havea 
selection lever, allowing the shooter to fire from 
the blaster, the slug-thrower or simultaneously 
from both. There is also a timing adjustment 
switch so that when both barrels are fired, the 


shot from one barrel can be delayed anywhere Wustration by Jerry DeCrotie 
from one-tenth of a second up to several seconds. 
E-11 Blaster Rifle (Modified) Game Notes: On constant-fire mode, each “shot” fires five 


blasts; holding the trigger down will fire six “shots” per 
round. In game terms, once a shot hits in a round, all 
following shots at the same or immediately adjacent tar- 
i : ets (within one meter) are one difficulty level lower. With 
pinnaa prkna Preek aa slug-thrower) this ee of firing mode, it is much easier to shoot down a 
Cost: 7.000 s row of stormtroopers or other targets. 
Availability: X, 4 Bantha/43:4:2:16/Crle Sometimes you have to 
Range: 3-30/100/300 (blaster), 3-30/150/400 (slug-thrower) stand up and get noticed. The best way to do it is 
Damage: 5D (blaster), 4D (slug thrower) carry a riot gun. When you've finished firing it in 
“constant-fire” mode, you not only have everyone's 
attention, but you are 
probably the only per- 
son standing. They're 
really only good if 
you're in a crowd of 
people—the range is 
fairly bad. But who 
cares? You're firing so 
many shots, you have 
to hit something. 


Slalliin/43:6:9:24/ 
Dele Spoken like an 
amateur. The problem 
with hosing around so 
much fire is that it 
makes you easy to 
spot, particularly in 
low-visibility situa- 


Model: BlasTech E-11/S Blaster Rifle 
Type: Modified blaster/slug-thrower 
Scale: Character 


Illustration by Mike Vilarci 


tions. You can just aim for where the spray of 
gunfire is coming from and take it out...usually 
with one shot. Corporate Sector Espos love to just 
blaze away with riot guns; | prefer finesse. 


Exotac Arms Predator Blaster Rifle 


The Predator is an experimental weapon, with 
only three prototypes in existence. Two are un- 
dergoing testing at Exotac Labs, while a galactic 
big game hunter called Kaori Batta got the call to 
handle the field evaluation. It is a large, cumber- 
some weapon that must be strapped across one’s 
back when not in use, However, its devastating 
damage and precision targeting system more than 
makes up for the added weight, especially when a 
huge beast is bearing down on you at full speed. 


Exotac Arms Predator Blaster Rifle 


Model: Exotac Arms EXP-7(a) Predator 

Type: Precision hunting blaster rifle 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster 

Ammo: 8 

Cost: 7,000 

Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: 1 

Fire Control: 2D (dual-laser targeting beams) 

Range: 3-30/80/350 

Damage: 7D 

Game Notes: Each time this blaster is fired, the user must 

make a Moderate Strength roll to contain the recoil and be 

able to fire it next round. 
Dykara/42:4:6:65/Crle | actually saw a Predator 
once, It was in the hands of the great hunter, Kaori 
Batta. I landed on Neftali once to deliver a ship- 
ment of some “under-the-table” consumables and 
was able to watch a demonstration of the Preda- 
tor. Batta was showing off for some gun-crazy 
tourists. It blew a hole through the target, through 
the tree bind it and took off a large chunk of the 
rock behind that. I asked where! could get one, but 
it’s apparently an experimental weapon, sol prob- 
ably won't see it again. That was the most power- 
ful blaster rifle I have ever seen. 


Sniper Blaster Rifle 


A sniper blaster is more than just a standard 
blaster rifle fitted with a macroscopic sight, al- 
though many a mercenary unit has simply made 
do by taping a pair of macrobinoculars to the top 
of a standard trooper rifle. Many sniper blasters 
can also serve as anti-vehicle weapons, enabling 
precision shots against control components, en- 
gine outlets and windscreens. Certain companies 
now build dedicated sniper blaster weapons as 
offshoots to their regular models. A few models 
offer componentability, allowing the weapon to 
be broken down into the most uninteresting-look- 
ing parts which can be carried around in a case or 
sack until needed for a quick assembly. 


Sniper Blaster Rifle 
Model: SoroSuub X-45 Sniper Rifle 
Type: Sniper blaster rifle 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blasters: sniper blasters 
Ammo; 25 
Cost: 750 
Availability: 2, R or X 
Fire Rate: | 
Range: !-25/100/250 
Damage: 5D 
Game Notes: When using the rifle's targeting scope, reduce 
all Long Range or precision shot difficulty levels to Moder- 
ate. 


Aiden/45:8:5:95/Sace Back when | was for hire as 
“freelance troubleshooter” | used this sniper rifle 
a great deal. | discovered that if you take the 
targeting package from a security droid—or other 
fourth degree unit—and patch it into the comput- 
erized scope, it improves accuracy (which is al- 
ready considerable) by as much as 30 percent. 


SoroSuub “Firelance” Blaster Rifle 


Just because SoroSuub joined up with the Em- 
pire didn’t mean that they stopped making weap- 
ons for other customers. The Firelance was de- 
signed specifically as a bounty hunter gun, with an 
easy grip and lightweight body that could be 
carried anywhere. It was also unmarked by either 
Imperial or SoroSuub codes, so it was untraceable 
in case the weapon had to be ditched quickly. 


SoroSuub “Firelance” Blaster Rifle 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Model: SoroSuub “Firelance” Blaster Rifle 

Type: Blaster rifle 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Blaster: blaster rifle 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 1,200 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 2, R or X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3-30/100/300 

Damage: 5D 
Fal’Orssk/40:9:6:98/Myre The Firelance has along 
history of being—to quote the ad copy—‘“the 
most effective weapon for freelance law-enforce- 
ment officials” (otherwise known as bounty hunt- 
ers). I personally don’t subscribe to the hype; I can 
name a dozen other blaster rifles that are also 
lightweight with an easy action. The only thing 


that makes the Firelance stand out is its lack of 
security Codes and serial numbers. Don't let the 
marketing fool you—the Firelance was built for 
killers, not bounty hunters. 


Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster Rifle 


As if having a blaster rifle for stormtroopers to 
use wasn't enough, Imperial Munitions decided to 
create a heavy blaster rifle for more damage. 
Draining the energy from the power gains the rifle 
more firepower, but it loses its amount of ammo 
and its range. Used by stormtroopers, it is mainly 
a gun used to inspire fear. 


Imperial Munitions Heavy Blaster Rifle 
Model: Imperial Munitions’ StarAnvil Heavy Blaster Rifle 
Type: Heavy blaster rifle 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: blaster rifle 
Ammo: 50 
Cost: 1,250 (power packs: 25) 

Availability: 4, X 

Fire Rate: | 

Range: 3-25/50/250 

Damage: 5D+2 

Game Notes: If the retractable stock and scope are used for 
one round of aiming, the character receives an additional 
+1D to blaster. 


“Credman”/42:5:3:19/Tshe The StarAnvil is one 
of the deadliest weapons that Imperial Munitions 
ever invented. They wanted to put a weapon in 
stormtroopers’ hands that would make the rest of 
the galaxy quake with fear. They certainly weren't 
kidding; not only does the StarAnvil cause a great 
deal of damage, but the stormtroopers could im- 
prove their aim as they fired it, making them really 
dangerous. Because it was strictly a stormtrooper 
weapon, demand is high among collectors and 
shooters who value an accurate weapon. 


Pulse Rifle 


This specialty weapon is a favorite of hunters 
who work in urban areas. This energy weapon's 
rapid pulse discharge is actually a series of micro- 
bursts of ion energy, which can be focused with 
equal effect on multiple targets within a frontal 60- 
degree arc of fire (effectively, the gun shoots out 
a “cone” of energy). In a closed environment, or in 
circumstances where one shot is all you get, a 
hunter's pulse rifle can quickly equalize a situa- 


Mustration by David Plunkett 


tion in which the hunter would otherwise be out- 
numbered and outgunned. Though portable and 
capable of taking considerable wear and tear, the 
super-conducting filaments, which regulate the 
beam’s hundreds of individual discharges in a 
single burst have a limited life-span and must be 
frequently replaced. 


Pulse Rifle 
Model: Corondexx VES-700 Pulse Rifle 
Type: Pulse rifle 
Scale: Character 


Skill: Blaster: pulse rifle 

Ammo: 15 (power pack), unlimited (power generator), 
super-conducting filaments must be replaced every 20 
shots. 

Cost: 5,000; 200 (power pack), 300 (super-conducting fila- 
ments) 

Availability: 4, X 

Range: |1-10/20/30 

Damage: 6D/5D/3D 

Game Notes: Character selects a target: the target and all 
beings in the cone of fire and within one-meter radius of the 
target take full damage. All targets within 15° either way of 
the target take 5D damage; all targets within 30° either way 
ofthe target take 3D damage. If the filaments aren't changed 
when scheduled, roll 2D for the first shot after the change 
time; add +1 for each additional shot. On a total of 7 or 
higher, the pulse rifle's overload circuits cut in and shut the 
weapon down, but the overload has caused 250 credits 
worth of damage (Moderate blaster repair total to fix). Ifthe 
total is 11 or higher, the overload circuits have failed and 
the weapon explodes in the user's hands, causing 9D 
damage in a two-meter blast radius. 


Fal’Orssk/39:3:5:83/Tate This is a pretty good 
gun to have on you if you have a back-up. A friend 
of mine was once in a bad situation, trapped in an 
alleyway with a pulse rifle, blocked in by a gang of 
Barabel. He didn’t have much of a choice, when it 
came time to change the filament, he just kept 
firing. When the filaments blew, it took out the last 
two remaining scum, and left him alive...barely. 
Yeah, he survived, but a good portion of his upper 
body has been replaced by cybernetic parts. 


Espo Grenade Mortar 

Micro-Grenade Launcher 
Portable Missile Launcher 
RPD-12 Rocket Launcher 


37 
37 


Espo Grenade Mortar 


The Espo mortar is a highly mobile artillery 
piece with a very small repulsorlift unit at its base. 
The repulsorlift unit provides no movement, but it 
makes it much easier to push or drag the mortar. 
The mortar fires any type of grenade (aside from 
range of the mortar, the grenade has all its stan- 
dard characteristics). 


Espo Grenade Mortar 

Model: Espo Grenade Mortar 

Skill: Blaster artillery 

Crew: | 

Ammo: 100 

Cost: 3,500 

Availability: 2, F, R, or X 

Body: 4D 

Fire Rate: 5 

Fire Control: 1D 

Range: 25—100/500/1KM 

Damage: Varies by grenade type 
Fotakex/44:8:2:75/Ette Grenade mortars are ex- 
cellent weapons, but for personal use they can be 
a little over-powered. | heard a story about a guy 
who fired off a mortar inside a spaceport. The 
mortar round bounced off the plasteel walls and 
ended up landing about five meters from his posi- 
tion. A warning to all you trigger-happy types: a 
mortar is designed for use in the field. 


ilustration by Tim Eldred 


Missile and 


Grenade Launchers 


Durund/44:8:8:09/Bone Don't remind me. I saw a 
squad of Espos cut loose on a bunch of laborers 
during a “contract dispute.” When used properly, 
these things are flargin’ deadly. 


Micro-Grenade Launcher 


This half-meter long, tubular grenade delivery 
system is a welcome addition to any hunter's 
private arsenal. Lightweight and portable, the 
launcher can deliver a micro-grenade cartridge 
with pinpoint accuracy up to 200 meters away. 
When activated, magnetic rings embedded inside 
the weapon's cylindrical housing propel the gre- 
nadeat high velocity and in direct line of sight with 
virtually no scattering. The weapon's almost 
soundless operation and lack of recoil make it 
highly suitable in situations demanding stealth, 

The Locris MGL-1 is a favored weapon of bounty 
hunters who aren't terribly interested in bringing 
a target in alive. The MGL-1 has a computerized 
firing system that allows the delivery of incendi- 
ary devices with tremendous accuracy. The most 
sophisticated element of the fire-control com- 
puter is its target recognition package; the com- 
puter stores a target in memory for several sec- 
onds, allowing the shooter to fire accurately at a 
selected target. 


Micro-Grenade Launcher 
Model: Locris Syndicates Model MGL-1 
Type: Micro-grenade launcher 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: micro-grenade launcher 
Ammo: 30 (magazine) 
Cost: 2,500; 1000 (micro-grenade magazine) 
Availability: 3, F 
Fire Rate: | 
Range: 5-25/100/200 
Blast Radius: 0-2/4/6 
Damage: 4D/3D/2D (fragmentation; other micro-grenades 
available) 


Game Notes: This micro-grenade launcher has a computer- 
ized fire-control system. If the character can make a mod- 
erate Perception roll (this is a free action and doesn't count 
as a skill use, so there are no penalties), the character can 
add +1D to hit when the weapon is fired; if the character is 
firing at the same target repeatedly, the character auto- 
matically gets the +1D for the second and following shots. 


illustration by David Plunkett 


Hyannis/38:4:1:02/Llie The micro-grenade 
launcher is a devastating weapon, but make sure 
that you replace the magnetic rings that propel 
the explosive. During a firefight on Maro Della, the 
rings—which had degraded after repeated use— 
failed and jammed a grenade in the barrel. I only 
had acouple of seconds to toss the gun before the 
grenade detonated. 


Portable Missile Launcher 


The PLX-4, the latest model of Merr-Sonn’s 
famous “Plex” series of missile launchers, serves 
as avery effective close-support weapon for infan- 
try troops. The PLX-4 fires both missiles and 
standard rockets and is designed for use on repul- 
sorlift vehicles. The launcher is the standard “over- 
the-shoulder” design, though new tripod mounts 
are available from third-party manufacturers, The 
PLX-4 can fire “dumb” rockets in a line-of-sight 
attack, “smart” rockets (the Gravity-Activated 
Mode, or GAM, guided missile designed for the 
Plex series) and the latest entry into anti-aircraft 
weaponry: “savant” missiles. 

Savant missiles are “surprise attack” weapons 
that have proven extremely effective against care- 
less pilots. When launched, the savant’s com- 
puter system does a sensor scan to “tag” the 
intended target. Then, the computer system goes 
into “savant” mode. 

To enemy pilots, incoming savants appear to 
be line-of-sight “dumb” rockets. With a couple of 
simple maneuvers, the pilot can easily avoid the 
rockets. The computer control system of the sa- 
vant missile does not activate for roughly five 
seconds (though different intervals can be pro- 
grammed into the missile)—long enough to foola 
pilot into thinking he has avoided destruction by 
a “dumb” rocket. 

When the savant delay has expired, the rocket’s 
computer system activates and homes in on the 
tagged target. Most pilots are fooled by the missile’s 
first pass and never even see the rocket swing 
around to hit them from behind. Savant missiles 
are not currently in wide use, but their remarkable 
success rate suggests that they will become in- 
creasingly popular with infantry or vehicle units. 
They are ideal for hit-and-fade attacks, and the 


Empire has used them extensively 
at Qat Chrystac. 


Portable Missile Launcher 
Model: Merr-Sonn PLX-4 Missile Launcher 
Type: Portable Missile Launcher 
Scale: Speeder 
Skill: Missile weapons: Plex 
Ammo: 4 (detachable missile rack) 

Cost: 6,000 (launcher), 200 (“dumb" 
rocket), 600 (“smart” GAM rocket), 1,000 
(“savant” rocket) 
Availability: R* 
Range: 100-500/3/10KM 
: 6D 
Game Notes: Savant Rockets: Because of the computer 
system necessary to fire the savant rockets, one round and 
a Moderate missile weapons roll is necessary to “tag” a 
target. If this roll is failed, it means that the “tag” system has 
not locked on the target and the weapon acts only as a 
“dumb” rocket, relying entirely on the missile weapons roll 
in the next round. If the roll is successful, the savant missile 
is considered to have a skill of 4D to hit the target (normally 
the rocket activates at point-blank range). The attacker 
must make a second missile weapons roll at normal diffi- 
culty for the straight-line rocket attack. 
* Note: This item is not available prior to the Battle of 
Endor. 
Fotakex/42:9:9:34/Ette These missile launchers 
are decent; they're not too much trouble to load 
or shoot, and they havea lot of punch. It is actually 
the savant missiles that Merr-Sonn offers that 
makes them valuable. Savants can cause a lot of 
damage toa vehicle, at least until after the first few 
hits. Once a pilot knows the rocket is a savant, he 
has a chance of surviving by some fancy maneu- 
vering. Usually the element of surprise is with you 
for the first shot only. 


Gunman/43:5:1:89/Elre The Plex is one of the 
best, most reliable launchers out there. The guided 
missiles are excellent. Once, during a campaign 
against an Imperial Moff, my team infiltrated his 
fortress and placed small transceivers near his 
key defenses. After we bugged out, the rest of the 
team launched guided missiles from under cover. 
The Imperials had no warning as three dozen 
missiles streaked in and smashed through the 
defenses. 


RPD-12 Rocket Launcher 


Another example of Locris Syndicates’ sophis- 
tication, this portable, self-propelled rocket deliv- 
ery system is the ideal weapon for live captures. 
While the standard Type-12A rocket darts with 
explosive contact detonators can be employed, 
most hunters prefer to use the Type-12B capsules, 
which are filled with the FGA-583 nerve agent. The 
gas affects a small blast area and can induce 
unconsciousness in a matter of seconds. 

Less-scrupulous hunters have been known to 
“hot load” their own chemical components (such 
as exotic poisons), but the manufacturer accepts 
no responsibility for the use of such modifica- 
tions. 


RPD-12 Rocket Launcher 
Model: Locris Syndicates Model RDP-12 Rocket Launcher 
Type: Rocket launcher 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: rocket launcher 
Ammo: 4 (internal magazine, individually loaded), 20 (ex- 
ternal clip) 
Cost: 1,500; 200 (clip of Type-12A capsules), 250 (clip of 
Type-12B capsules), 12 (single Type-A capsule), 15 (single 
Type-12B capsule) 
Availability: 3, F or R 
Range: 3-30/100/300 
Blast Radius: 0-1 
Damage: 4D (Type-12A); 5D (stun damage; Type-12B) 
Game Notes: In addition to the stun damage taken from the 
Type-12B capsule due to kinetic energy on impact, charac- 
ter must make a Difficult stamina skill roll or be incapaci- 
tated by the FGA-583 nerve agent. A successful roll still 
results in-1D to all actions for the next six rounds (penalties 
are cumulative for multiple hits). 


Staven/41:9:4:63/Stee I've had very few problems 
with this rocket launcher, though it is a good idea 
to make sure the weapon has been properly 
cleaned. The RPD-12 is particularly sensitive to 
dirt and contamination. An improperly maintained 
Locris is prone to jamming and misfiring if there’s 
dirt anywhere near the firing circuits. Basically, a 
capsule will jam shut and strike the target (caus- 
ing serious injury) instead of delivering the darts 
or sleep agent. 


Apex Incisor Missile 


Finbat Anti-Walker Concussion Missile 


Anti-Vehicle Grenade 
Czerka Spore/B Stun Grenade 
Czerka T-289 Gas Grenade 
Glop Grenade 

Greff-Timms 0033X Grenade 
Mer-Sonn Stun Grenade 
RGL-80 Electronet Grenade 
Smoke Grenades 

ABC Scrambler 

Detonite Tape 

E-Mag Mine 

Lowickan Firegems 
Merr-Sonn Shaped Charges 


40 
40 
41 
41 
41 
42 
42 
42 
43 


43 
43 
44 
44 


45 
45 


Mesonics Shaped-Charge Explosives 46 


Plasticene Thermite Gel 


46 


Apex Incisor Missile 


The Golog-Bertum Apex Incisor is a small one- 
shot, anti-vehicle weapon. To use, point the 
Incisor’s nose at the target and depress the 
“record” stud mounted on the 
weapon's side. The weapon takes a 
mass spectral record of the target, 
from its infrared exhaust signature 
toits shift-shield output. After press- 
ing the “arm” switch, the weapon's 
internal motor ignites and the mis- 
sile hunts down the target. After this 
point, running away is highly recom- 
mended in order to avoid the motor’s 
scalding exhaust. 


Apex Incisor Missile 
Model: Golog-Bertum Apex Incisor Mis- 
sile 
Type: Surface-to-air missile 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Cost: 1,000 
Availability: 2, X 
Fire Control: 3D 
Range: 0-50/250/1000 
Damage: 7D 
Game Notes: The Incisor is fired by pointing the missile at 
the intended target and pressing the “record” button for 
one round. On the next available round, the “arm” button 
may be pressed on the weapon. The character firing the 
weapon must run away from the weapon (Easy dodge skill 
roll) or suffer 3D damage from the motor's scalding ex- 
haust. 


Fotakex/41:4:8:58/Ette | never really like Incisor 
missiles. There's always a risk of the missile ignit- 
ing before you get far enough away. I've seen too 
many buddies get scorched by this—makes me 
edgy even having one near me. 


Gunman/41:8:2:89/Elre Sounds like your missile 
“specialist” forgot the first rule of demolitions and 
explosives delivery: clean your weapon. If the 
Incisor’s targeting sensors get smudged by dirt or 
skin oil, it'll bollix up the arming sequence hand- 
ily. Always check and recheck your gear. 


Missiles, Grenades 
and Explosives 


Finbat Anti-Walker Concussion Missile 


The Kessler J8Q Finbat is a portable concus- 
sion missile designed to take out large, slow- 
moving armor targets like Imperial AT-ST and AT- 
AT walkers. The Finbat can be prepped, aimed and 
fired by one person. After firing, the launch tube 
section is discarded and exchanged for another 
unit. 

The Finbat warhead consists of not one, but 
four separate segments to penetrate heavy armor. 
The final explosive, housed in the missile’s main 
body, is designed to fragment and continue mov- 
ing throughout the target’s body, causing as much 
internal damage as possible. 


<i EB 


Finbat Anti-Walker Concussion Missile 
Model: Kessler J8Q-128 Finbat Missile 
Type: Anti-walker missile 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Ammo: | missile per launcher 
Cost: 4,000 
Availability: R, X 
Body: 1D 
Range: 0-50/250/500 
Damage: 12D 
Game Notes: 
On Target: lf the attacker's result, compared to the difficulty 
number, is less than or equal to 7, then the weapon was not 
fired accurately and the Finbat's damage result is automati- 
cally halved. 
Interception: Because the Finbat is slow on takeoff, the 
missile takes at least two rounds to reach a Long Range 
target and may be fired upon before it strikes. The difficulty 
level of shooting down a Finbat under flight is Very Difficult. 
If struck, compare the attacker's damage with the Finbat's 
own Body attribute. 


Jorsk/38:2:1:56/Taae The Finbat is one of the 
best ways of taking out an AT-AT ever invented. 
The first time a batch of anti-walker missiles 
showed up on the black market, they were picked 
clean before the Empire even caught a whiff of 


’ 


em. 


Mal’urc/38: 6:2:09/Bote | bet the Imperials were 
shocked the day a lone Rebel waltzed over, set up 
the launcher and fired a missile into the neck of 
the nearest walker. The first time I used a Finbat, 
the AT-AT was decapitated and—after the explo- 
sions died down—the Rebels just came in and 
cleaned out the wreckage. One of the most amus- 
ing battles | ever saw. 


Grenades 


Anti-Vehicle Grenade 


Anti-vehicle grenades consist of two or more 
explosives—the first punches a hole in the craft's 
outer skin or armor, the second causes internal 
damage. While they are highly effective against 
speeders and other armored vehicles, they still 
lack the ability to seriously damage large armored 
vehicles like Imperial walkers. 


Anti-Vehicle Grenade 
Model: Galentro Armaments Anti-Vehicle Explosive 
Type: Anti-vehicle/anti-armor grenade 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Grenade 
Cost: 750 
Availability: R, X 
Damage: 7D 


Game Notes: When used against Speeder-scale or smaller 
targets, do not use the Scale Comparison Chart to reduce 
damage. 


Dykara/40:5:2:95/Tey* You have to love a weapon 
that puts big holes through armor. | used one of 
these during a smuggling run in the Corporate 
Sector that went bad. | just tossed one of these 
babies off of the back of my airspeeder and took 
out the Espo floater behind me. Got off the planet 
without a scratch. 


Czerka Spore/B Stun Grenade 


This grenade releases Bothan stun spores. It is 
ineffective against targets wearing breath masks 
or sealed suits. The spores enter a target's respi- 
ratory system, slowing the rate of breathing until 
the victim falls unconscious. While—in theory— 
this type of grenade should reduce breathing in a 
non-fatal method, it is not entirely foolproof. Tar- 
gets of this infamous type of grenade have known 
to enter respiratory failure when subjected to the 
stun agent. Roughly one in twelve humans and one 
in twenty Bothans suffer this type of reaction to 
the Spore/B grenade. 


Czerka Spore/B Stun Grenade 
Model: Czerka Spore/B Stun Grenade 
Type: Stun grenade 
Skill: Grenade 
Cost: 300 
Availability: 2, X 
Range: 0-8/16/25 
Blast Radius: 0-2/20/40 
Damage: 4D/3D/2D (stun) 
Capsule: Characters that roll a “1” on the Wild Die when 
resisting the spore effects go into respiratory failure and 
must be resuscitated (Moderate first aid roll) or die of 
suffocation within 2D rounds. 


Jatras/40:9:2:47/Tale These grenades are just too 
much of a hazard; | refuse to use the Bothan stun 
grenade. I'm sure there are some people who are 
willing to take back the body for a lesser price, but 
I deal mostly with live bounties—bringing back 
runaways or ransom victims; I've been known to 
do a “snatch-and-grab” or two for the right cause 
and price. There are better, safer methods than 
this grenade. 


Czerka T-289 Gas Grenade 


This grenade releases T-289 stun gas. It is non- 
fatal, except in very large doses, and causes in- 
tense nausea, disorientation and vomiting. It is 
ineffective against targets wearing a breath mask 
or sealed suit. 


Czerka T-289 Gas Grenade 
Model: Czerka T-289 Gas Grenade 
Type: Stun grenade 
Scale: character 
Skill: Grenade 
Cost: 325 credits 
Availability: 2, X 
Range: (8/16/25 
Blast Radius: 0-2/20/40 
Damage: 4D/2D/1D (stun) 


Ellylyn/40:5:2:86/Nare The gas grenade is some- 
times a necessary weapon in your arsenal. There 


lllustraton by Storm Cook 


are several species who are simply too strong and 
shake off the effects of stun blasts—and some- 
times can even withstand a good blaster shot. 
Most of them, however can easily be taken down 
with T-289 stun gas, rendered helpless against 
dizziness and nausea. 


Dashh/40:7:1:08/Nale Yeah, I used T-289 stun gas 
on a Wookiee once; it slowed him down all right. 
Unfortunately, that famed Wookiee temper al- 
lowed him to get in a few good hits before he 
passed out. I spent a month stewing in bacta, 
which cost me more than the bounty on the Wook. 
Stun gas is effective, but I still say use it on targets 
you know it will work on. 


Glop Grenade 


Glop grenades are effective riot control weap- 
ons. Rather than releasing metal shards or lethal 
thal gases, glop grenades spray an extremely 
strong adhesive chemical 
foam over the entire blast 
area. The adhesive holds (Ye 
those covered with to the 
ground, incapacitating them. 

The fist-sized plastic sphere & 

is light and can be thrown Tim Eldred 
farther than most other gre- 

nades. The standard Espo glop grenade, made by 
Merr-Sonn, can be set to explode on impact, or 
timed for up to a 15 second delay. 


Glop Grenade 

Model: Merr-Sonn Glop Grenade 

Scale: Character 

Cost: 275 

Availability: 2, R or X 

Range: 3-7/30/60 

Blast Radius: 0-1/3/5 

Damage: 6D/5D/3D (Strength of glop; character must make 

opposed roll to break free of glop; glop does not cause 

damage) 
Darry/43:8:4:28/Umge | was trying to collect a 
bounty on a Rebel cell I had uncovered on Derilyn. 
Since the bounty was astounding for all six of 
them, I decided to use a glop grenade to take them 
all down at once. Well, I threw the grenade into the 
room and, sure enough, the adhesive spread like 
a dream. | just had to cut them all loose, lock them 
in binders and march off to collect by bounty. 


Prinlaeco/44:2:2:98/Tate | heard about a hunter 
who did just that to a group of pirates off Sullust. 
Apparently, one of the pirates had his face to- 
wards the grenade and was suffocated by the 
“glop.” Lately, the New Republic has instituted 
research into developing a grenade that disperses 
semi-permeable resin, allowing respiration after 
capture. So far, the experiment hasn't been suc- 
cessful. 


Greff-Timms 0033X Grenade 


Like modern grenades, the 0033X is a bulky, 
one-shot explosive used for areas where enemy 
forces are concentrated in a small area. This type 
of grenade is about the size of a human fist, with 
a small arming stud and has settings for instant or 
a ten-second delayed explosion. The G-T 0033X 
was the principal infantry explosive of Old Repub- 
lic jump troopers. 


Greff-Timms 0033X Grenade 

Model: Greff-Timms Industrial Nitrocellulose Incendiary 

Device 0033X 

Type: Explosive 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Grenade 

Cost: 300 

Availability: 1, R 

Range: 3-7/20/40 

Blast Radius: (-2/4/6/10 

Damage: 4D/3D/2D/1D 
Trenton/41:5:9:48/Kuae I've got a crate of these 
grenades back home. There are three missing off 
the top, but the rest have been sitting for hun- 
dreds of years. I don’t know if they even work of 
not; I'm too afraid to take the risk of a premature 
explosion. | figure sooner or later I'll sell them to 
a museum or something to get rid of them; I’m 
tired of dragging them around. Anybody looking 
to purchase these relics can contact me on 
Sacorria. 


Merr-Sonn Stun Grenade 


Stun grenades are effective riot control weap- 
ons, capable of taking out large numbers of targets 
without inflicting permanent injury. This particu- 
lar stun grenade, made by 
Merr-Sonn, is reusable. It 
is a multi-faceted metallic 
sphere dotted with beam 
splitters. When thrown, 
the grenade discharges an 
energy blast stored in op- 
tic capacitors. When the 
blast hits the splitters, the 
blast area is blanketed in 
blinding, disorienting stun 
energy. The grenades are 
rechargeable (the grenade can only hold one blast 
at atime) and can be set to go off onimpact or time 
delayed for anywhere from five to 45 seconds. 


Merr-Sonn Stun Grenade 
Model: Merr-Sonn Stun Grenade 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Grenade 
Cost: 450 
Availability: 2, R or X 
Range: ()-8/16/25 
Blast Radius: (-2/20/40 
Damage: 6D/5D/3D/2D (stun) 


Capt. Rislar/40:9:7:39/Orde You can get a lot of 
use out of Merr-Sonn’s stun grenade. For its price, 
it’s probably the best deal you can make. I've 
thrown them in nests of Stormtroopers to escape 
ugly situations, orin the hold of ashipto knock out 
the passengers. It’s very easy to use and after- 
wards, you just pick it right back up and fit it toa 
recharger for the next time you need it...you have 
to love it. 


War’ qui/43:3:1:41/Atze It is actually possible to 
modify this type of grenade to accept a detonite 
charge. Outwardly, it has all the serial numbers 
and identification markings of a standard stun 
grenade, but it packs the wallop of a good frag- 
mentation explosive. The only trouble is measur- 
ing out the proper amount of detonite or other 
high-explosive. Too much and you can get tagged 
by your own blast. Too little may leave more 
opponents standing than you can handle. 


RGL-80 Electronet Grenade 


An electronet is a webbing of sticky, current- 
conducting fibers encased in the small warhead of 
agrenade-style canister round. When fired through 
a standard grenade launcher, a thin control wire 
trails the projectile downrange. At the appropri- 
ate range, a signal from the operator's control 
panel (located underneath the launch tube) causes 
the warhead’s outer casing to discharge, forcing 
the interior webbing to unravel and expand to a 
two-meter diameter. Once in contact with the 
target, a variable electrical charge can be applied 
through the trailing guide wire. The current, and 
thus damage level, is variable, so this weapon can 
be used as both a stun weapon or a lethal assault 
weapon. 


RGL-80 Electronet Grenade 
Model: Golon Arms RGL-80 Electronet Grenade 
Type: Anti-personnel wire-guided grenade 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: grenade launcher 
Ammo: 5 (force-fed magazine with power generator; at- 
taches to grenade magazine holder) 
Cost: 2,000 (magazine) 
Availability: 2, F 
Fire Rate: 1/2 (power generator can only control one 
activated net at a time) 
Range: 10-250/350/500 
Damage: 1-10D (variable stun or normal damage) 


Jatras/37:4:9:57/Bare This electronet has a few 
bugs. For one thing, you actually have to aim the 
grenade launcher. In this case, a stun grenade 
works just as well. Also, while they say you can 
deliver an electric charge through the guide wire, 
if the target moves out of the 500-meter range, or 
pulls hard enough on the wire, it can disconnect 
from the control box. I just think a stun grenade is 
easier, though probably not as intimidating. 


Smoke Grenades 


A popular form of non-lethal riot control, these 
grenades are often used to disorient targets or can 
be a target point for incoming long-range blaster 
artillery or other attacks. 


Smoke Grenades 
Model: BlasTech Nacht-5 Smoke Grenade 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 25 credits 
Availability: 2, R, F, or X 
Range: 3-7/20/40 
Smoke Radius: 0-3 


Bantha/42:2:3:90/Crle Never use smoke grenades 
if you are on the wrong side of the law—it doesn’t 
stop the police from advancing and it lets any 
airborne vehicles in the area know that there is 
something wrong. 


Explosives 


ABC Scrambler 


The ABC (Aural-Biological-Chemical) Scrambler 
is a modified version of an Imperial army anti- 
ordnance EM probe. Launched toward incoming 
missiles, it was originally designed to disrupt the 
electronic guidance signals of smart munitions in 
flight. In its present form, the scrambler emits a 
full spectrum of ultrasonics, biological irritants, 
and chemical agents over a wide area, which 
combine to disorient an opponent, effectively pro- 
ducing a massive sensory overload lasting for 
several minutes. 


ABC Scrambler 
Model: Modified Loronar ABX-110 Tube-Launched ABC 
Scrambler 
Type: Anti-personnel sensory disorientation device 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons: ABC scrambler 
Ammo: | (per pod; each new pod must be attached to tube 
launcher) 
Cost: 3,000; 350 (pod) 
Availability: 2, R (for licensed hunters) or X (non-military 
or hunters) 
Fire Control: 1D+2 
Range: 50-200/350/500 
Blast Radius: 0-10/20/30 
Damage: 8D/5D/3D 
Game Notes: The launch tube is 1.2 meters long and each 
pod is a back-attached box that is 20 cm long, 10 cm wide 
and 5 em tall, ABC scrambler pods take one minute to 
change; if the character wishes to rush the change process; 
the character must make a Technical roll: 


Roll Time to change pod 
Heroic One round 

Very Difficult Two rounds 
Difficult Three rounds 
Moderate Four rounds 


Easy Five rounds 
Ulmac/42:7:3:63/Gare The Empire used to use 
ABC Scramblers for taking out large groups of 


civilians—they’d loose a blast over the heads of a 
crowd they felt were being unruly and soon people 
would be lying in the streets, screaming in agony 
because they don’t know whether to use their 
hands to cover their ears or to scratch their skin 
off. 


Trenton/42:5:9:29/Kua* This weapon will affect 
everyone so remember you will probably take out 
some innocents as well as your intended victims. 
You hit the wrong person—like your partners— 
and you'll be apologizing for years. 


Detonite Tape 


Flex-5 Detonite Tape is a plastic adhesive tape 
impregnated with concentrated detonite and is 
packaged in 5-meter rolls. The compound is fairly 
stable and requires intense heat or an electrical 
charge to detonate. Much like a shape-charged 
projectile, the tape can blast a hole through many 
materials. It is especially useful for blowing seams, 
such as hatches and hull-plates. Since the tape is 
flexible and self-binding, it can be applied where 
normal explosives may be awkward to use. In the 
hands of an expert, the tape can sever just the 
right connection or break the smallest lock with- 
out causing collateral damage. 


Detonite Tape 
Model: Merr-Sonn Munitions Compound Flex-5 Detonite 
Tape 
Type: Adhesive explosive strip 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Demolition 
Cost: 1,500 (per 5 meters) 
Availability: X 
Difficulty: 10 
Blast Radius: 0-0.5 meters 


Damage: 3D 
Meydhu/42:6:9:35/Bsc* Detonite tape is a good 
thing for any thief, smuggler or pirate to have. | 
practically use up a roll a week, for jobs ranging 
from opening crates to cracking ships’ holds. 


Lotrent/42:7:0:09/Bote I've used detonite tape 
during the war. It was great for blasting the hatch 
off a vehicle and grabbing the person inside— 
usually a very surprised Imperial officer. 


E-Mag Mine 

The simple mines quietly wait for the presence 
of repulsorlift fields found on low-flying vehicles 
such as landspeeders or similar craft. When a field 
is detected directly above, the mine immediately 
fires a vertical salvo of shrapnel into the passing 
vehicle, damaging it severely. 

E-Mag mines are typically found on worlds 
where prying eyes are not desired. Their sensor 
arrays can also be modified to detect ground- 
effect and surface-pressure traffic. 


E-Mag Mine 

Model: Mesonics E-Mag Explosive Mine 

Type: Anti-repulsorlift mine 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Demolitions 

Cost: 200 

Availability: 2, R, X 

Damage: 7D 

Game Notes: The mine’s sensors cannot detect the pres- 

ence of repulsorlift vehicles higher than 25 meters above 

the ground. The mines can also be calibrated to detect foot 

traffic. The mine's sensor units have a sensors skill of 6D to 

detect repulsorlift traffic nearby. 
Fal’Orssk/38:7:3:80/Chae The only problem that 
these mines had was how fast the Empire came 
down on Mesonics after a few explosions wiped 
out some high-placed Moffs. The Empire “re- 
quested” that the company allow the Imperials to 
“protect” them by stationing guards in and around 
the building, All they asked in return was an 
unlimited supply of mines and the right to deny 
any outside requests for mines. Essentially, they 
denied all requests, keeping the mines for them- 
selves. Still, several skillful workers were able to 
make a profit by selling mines on the black market. 
The New Republic is also trying to keep an eye on 
these mines, but they are certainly not as harsh as 
the Empire was. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Anti-vehicle grenade (top), Mesonics shaped-charge 
explosive (right) and an E-Mag mine (bottom). 


Lowickan Firegems 


Lowickan Firegems can only be found in the 
Pa’Lowick system, near Kessel. These unusual 
stones are naturally formed in the Lowick Aster- 
oid Belt and are extremely difficult to mine. Be- 
cause of the strange gravitic quirks of the region 
(caused by an unusual series of gravity waves 
possibly caused by solar activity) the crystals are 
extremely heavy and dense as well as difficult to 
mine. 

The gemstones are small—typically between 4 
and 6 cm in diameter—and smoothly rounded at 
the edges. They glow with a deep, wine-red color 
and are usually slightly warm to the touch. This 
internal glow is caused by a strange molecular 
vibration that is also a side effect of their forma- 
tion. The gems are mildly radioactive, and pro- 
longed exposure to a Firegem’s radiation can be 
fatal to humans. 

One of the most dangerous side-effects of the 
Firegems is not their radioactivity. The molecular 
vibration that causes Firegems to glow is trans- 
formed into outright instability when exposed to 
other forms of radiation. If introduced intoaship’s 
reactor, they will detonate the first time the ship 
enters hyperspace. The gems’ internal molecular 
vibration creates an competing harmonic withthe 
resonance frequency of a standard starship’s 
power source. In a vessel the size of a freighter or 
passenger liner, a Lowickan Firegem can cause 
massive destruction. 

Criminal organizations and terrorist groups 
prefer to use Firegems to destroy spacecraft in 
transit; rather than carry bulky and easily de- 
tected explosives, a small Firegem in a radiation- 
shielded carrier is extremely simple to smuggle 
past security forces. However, to properly work 
as a bomb, the Firegem must be introduced into 
the target vessel’s reactor injector module. The 
gem must be stored in a dense, radiation-resistant 
magnetic field that will break down when the 
hyperdrive is engaged. When the “bottle” does 
break down, the Firegem is exposed to the reactor 
core radiation and creates a massive explosion. 

Possession of Firegems is extremely illegal, 
though Imperial Intelligence has been known to 
mine the stones for military purposes. Currently 
the Empire is experimenting (without success) 
with the stones, hoping to use the gems as a power 
source. The Pa’Lowick system itself has been 
quarantined, and a task force of Star Destroyers 
and Customs cruisers patrol the region constantly. 


Lowickan Firegems 
Type: Natural Explosive 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Demolitions: Lowickan Firegems 
Cost: 45,000 each 
Availability: X 
Blast Radius: 300 meters 


Damage: 8D 
Game Notes: Under proper conditions, Lowickan Firegems 
can explode, creating a huge blast radius. However, they 
must be stored under the proper conditions; any unpro- 
tected Firegem that is exposed to radiation can prema- 
turely detonate. In addition, a Firegem causes 1D of radia- 
tion damage every Standard hour to handlers who are not 
wearing the proper radiation gear. 
Yideg/42:9:5:68/Liae A Hutt | once worked for 
liked to use Firegems to wipe out competitors. His 
boys—posing as local customs officers or mainte- 
nance techs—would put the Firegem into a ship's 
reactor and then wait for the fireworks. Once the 
Empire went down, it became a lot easier to find 
these explosives on the market. The New Republic 
has been so busy with the chaos of running the 
government that they don’t have the resources to 
regulate these things. 


Kollan/42:9:9:87/Tare Don’t be so sure that 
Firegems aren't regulated; the Sector Rangers and 
NRI have upgraded the threat level of Lowickan 
Firegems and a new scanning system is appar- 
ently being developed to track the unique radia- 
tion signature of these explosives. 


Merr-Sonn Shaped Charges 


Shaped charges are specially designed explo- 
sives, generally used for demolitions work by 
construction engineers and military units. Shaped 
charges are used to penetrate strong building 
materials, suchas duracrete, plasteel and durelium 
ships’ hulls. According to an Imperial demolitions 
primer, a shaped charge “is an explosive device 
fashioned to direct the explosive force of a deto- 
nation in a predetermined direction.” The actual 
shape of such an explosive helps the user direct 
the force of a detonation to maximize effective- 
ness or damage (or in some cases, to limit damage 
to a small area). 


Merr-Sonn Shaped Charges 
Model: Merr-Sonn Munitions Pre-Shaped Detonite Charge 
Type: Shaped charge 
Scale: Character or Speeder 
Skill: Demolitions 
Cost: 200 
Availability: 2, R 
Difficulty: Moderate 
Damage: 2D per charge (plus applicable bonus) 


Game Notes: Successful use of a shaped charge increases 

the explosion’s damage by +2D. 
Lowwel/43:7:4:03/Rale The Merr-Sonn shaped 
charge is one of the best on the market (and 
certainly better than the Mesonics charge). If 
used correctly, it takes only three Merr-Sonn ex- 
plosives to surpass the damage of one Mesonics 
charge, yet Merr-Sonn charges are only 200 cred- 
its apiece while a Mesonics explosive is usually 
2,500 credits for one. The difficulty in timing the 


charges for simultaneous detonation is only mod- 
erate, so Merr-Sonn charges are the most cost- 
effective way to go. 


Mesonics Shaped-Charged Explosive 


Shaped charges are cone-shaped devices that 
concentrate nearly all their damage into a tiny 
area, making them useful against airlock doors, 
vehicle components and critical sections on load- 
bearing structures. They are predominantly used 
by rescue teams in order to save lives, although 
others have found deadlier uses for them. 


Mesonics Shaped-Charged Explosive 

Model: Mesonics Focalized Explosive 

Type: Shaped-charged explosive 

Scale: Character or Speeder 

Skill: Demolition 

Cost: 2,500-3,000 

Availability: 2, R or X 

Damage: 10D 

Game Notes: When the explosive is set, reduce the Strength 

dice of the target by -1D. 
Capt. Rislar/37:4:2:75/Tate All ship-jackers should 
carry a supply of shaped-charged explosives. | 
still think Mesonics makes the best. It works great 
when you are trying to blow an airlock...provided 
you aren't interested in recovering the ship itself. 


Plasticene Thermite Gel 


This greyish-white, putty-like substance is 
widely used by underworld elements as a fast- 
acting means of gaining entrance to restricted 
areas with a minimum amount of noise. Once 
removed from its protective wrapping, a full kilo- 
gram ofthis lightweight substance can be stretched 
and molded as needed to cover a surface area of 
twenty square centimeters. 


illustration by Storn Cook 


Once ignited by an electronic detonator, ther- 
mite gel burns at a constant temperature of 500 
degrees centigrade. Capable of defeating most 
standard locking mechanisms, it can also be used 
to burn through armored plating and other pro- 
tective surfaces. 


Plasticene Thermite Gel 
Model: Gatrellis Plasticene Thermite Cube 
Type: Controlled pyrotechnic explosive 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Demolitions 
Cost: 1,000 per kilogram 
Availability: 2, X 
Damage: 20D for a full kilogram per round, 2D per hundred 
grams per round; three rounds burning time for 0.50 kilo- 
gram application. 
Game Notes: Ignition by detonator can be achieved by 
remote relay. Thermite gel can be shaped, molded, or 
stretched, and a full kilo can cover up to 20 square meters, 
A character must make a demolitions skill roll to correctly 
set the gel; the difficulty is based on how reinforced the 
target is (light doors require only a Very Easy total; rein- 
forced bulkheads could require a Very Difficult total). 


Yideg/41:9:2:11/Lia® This stuff is one of the most 
powerful explosives I’ve ever used. My boss had 
us get some to prove a point to a smuggler who 
was extremely late on paying off a debt. We liter- 
ally melted a hole through the side of his ship after 
he had locked himself in to hold us off. We took the 
cargo back, as well as anything else we found of 
value in there. We left him the ship. 


Gunman/41:9:5:23/Elre Back with my old unit, 
we used thermite gel to burn through hardened 
bunker defenses. They can defend all they want 
against a frontal assault—they hardly ever expect 
you to come at them through the walls. 


ASAA Personal Defense Module 
Arelik Armor 

Armored Vacuum Suit 

Blast Vest 

Camo Armor 

Castaan Staad Armor 
Creshaldyne Riot Armor 
Corellian 644 Combat Armor 
Corellian HuntSuit 

Coynite Battle Armor 

CT3 Concussion Helmet 
CV14-B Concussion Vest 
Doubler Suit 

Dragon Armor 

Dura-Armor 

Espo Armor 

Espo Riot Armor 

Flex-Armor 

Gladiator Armor 

Heavy Radiation Powersuit 
Juggernaut Armor 
Koromondain PDS, Inc Protective Vest 
Leviathan Armor 

Link Armor 

Malgon Armor 

Merr-Sonn Armored Spacesuit 
Nemesis Armor 

Nova-Tech Powersuit 

Reflect Body Glove 

Riot Shield 

SeaScape Diving Suit 
Smasher Armor 

Stalker Armor 

Sunder 9 Prototype Armor 
Ubese Raider Armor 
Vagabond Suit 

Wrokix Works Armored Spacesuit 
Antipersonnel Net Gun 
Electric Field 

Mini-Missile Launcher 
Mini-Torpedo Launcher 
Motion Sensor Array 

Wrist Lasers 


59 


ERKRFSSSSSS SSsss 


Armor and 


Armor Attachments 


Armor 


A3AA Personal Defense Module 


Generally found among hunters with an affinity 
for advanced technology, this defense suit is per- 
fect for “hot” environments where an intense 
firefight is anticipated. The suit offers limited 
physical protection, but has a micro-nozzle spray 
system that sprays a mixture of refined courenth, 
with trace amounts of ves. The cloud around the 
suit effectively disperses laser bolts and the de- 
sign is pirated from an idea first put forth by Rebel 
General Airen Cracken in his field manual for 
Rebel soldiers. The suit provides the wearer with 
afive-meter-diameter cloud that disperses charged 
energy beams, effectively rendering blaster bolts 
ineffective. Dependent on prevailing wind condi- 
tions, once triggered, the dissipation field remains 
in effect upwards of four minutes. An optional 
adjustment permits the module to generate a 
continuous 30-degree forward-facing cone of dis- 
persal, making rapid forward movement possible 
in the face of concentrated enemy fire. 


A3AA Personal Defense Module 
Model: Corellian Technologies A3AA Personal Defense 
Module 
Type: Personal defense system 
Ammo: 3 
Cost: 8,500 (often much more on the black market) 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: Generally available only to Imperial scouts 
and covert troops. The cloud reduces damage of all blaster 
bolts by -2D. the suit itself provides a +2D physical, +1D 
energy protection, but also reduces Dexterity and related 
actions by -1D, 


Homack/43:3:6:02/Bste The biggest problem with 
A3AA armor is its lack of physical protection. 
Sure, it'll dispel a blaster shot just fine, but as soon 
as | realize I'm up against someone with this kind 
or armor, | start firing a slugthrower or lobbing 
grenades. 


Arelik Armor 


Arelik armor, designed by Stavren Arelik, is 
designed specifically for bounty hunters. It pro- 
vides modest protection against energy and 


physcial attacks, though it is specifically designed 
to allow the addition of sensing modules. 


Arelik Armor 

Model: Stock Arelik Armor 

Type: Personal battle armor 

Cost: Not available for sale 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Notes: 

Armor; Provides +2D to Strength for physical attacks, +1D 

for energy attacks; -1D to Dexterity and related skills. Cov- 

ers head, torso and arms. 

Sensor Pod: +1D to search. 

Infrared Sensor: Adds +1D to Perception in darkness. 

Environment Filter: Helmet filter system can prevent harm- 

ful molecules from entering the 

lungs. 
Staven/37:1:5:92/Bone A 
bounty hunter named 
Beylessa managed to “con- 
vince” most folks that the 
Arelik design was hers. After 
she retired, a lot of young 
punks out on the Rim began 
wearing a similar armor de- 
sign. 
Hoshen/37:5:3:09/Quae This 
armor is extremely easy to 
modify, if you are looking to 
add extra motion sensors or 
other detection gear. How- 
ever, the power cells needed 
to power the detection gear 
must be mounted externally, 
since the armor is basically 
form-fitting and skin-tight. 
Stray blaster rounds can 
catch a power cell and cause 
a minor explosion, so addi- 
tional armor is a good idea. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Armored Vacuum Suit 


Corellian Technologies’ armored vacsuit is 
based on the classic Incom model in standard use. 
The suit grants the advantages of a vacuum suit 
while providing moderate protection against 
blaster fire. The suit has a limited self-sealing 
factor. 


£ 


7 trahi 
i ‘ 
BS 


Blast Vest 
Model: Corondexx Blast Vest 
Type: Protective vest 
Cost: 3,000, 25 (power cells) 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: 
Protective Vest: The power cells project an ablative power 
screen that adds +1D for energy attacks; +2 physical at- 
tacks. Torso only. 
Power Cell Storage: Vest can store six standard power cells. 
Cells are drained in 10 minutes of continuous operation. 
Power Jacks: \n place of 
power units, the vest has 
power jacks allowing a 
small capacitor to be 
charged from a portable 
power generator, Re- 
quires one hour to charge 
and the capacitor can 
power the vest for two 
minutes of continuous 
operation, 


Darry/39:1:6:72/Umge 
Don't ever get this type 
of armor unless you can 
get it cheap. It costs too 
much to buy it, too 
much to keep it pow- 
ered, and it still doesn’t do enough good to save 
you in a fight. There are many other sets of armor 
on the market that do a better job. My biggest 
gripe with the Corondexx is how fast it runs out of 


Wustration by Christina Waid 


illustration by Storn Cook 


Armored Vacuum Suit 
Model: Corellian Technologies Boarding Armor 
Type: Armored vacuum suit 
Cost: 4,000 credits 


Availability: 2, R 

Game Notes: 

Armor +1D versus physical attacks, +1D to energy. 
Vacuum: Holds 10 hours of atmosphere; user must make 


power. The first time | wore one in a firefight, it 
gave out just as one of my opponents drew a bead 
on me. (It still itches where they had to re-grow my 


skin.) 
Casting/39:5:0:00/Hap* Actually, | modified my 


Moderate stamina check every hour exposed to space or 
suffer a wound. 


> 5 
> p A 
aa f E 
ERT 
A wy par 
.- į Í A 


Narseri/42:9:1:38/Hose There's a lot of pirates 
out there who have to start small to eke out a 
living. No matter how few credits you have, pick 
up a Corellian vacuum suit. It’s fairly cheap as far 
as boarding armor goes, and it will save your life 
someday, guaranteed. It isn't spacetrooper ar- 
mor, but the self-seal is virtually foolproof. The 
few extra seconds it can keep you alive may make 
all the difference in a bad situation. 


Blast Vest 


A piece of anti-blaster protective garb favored 
among hunters for its light weight. This vest 
projects a localized high energy ion field to distort 
and disrupt the effects of blaster fire, providing 
modest protection. Of course, this type of tech- 
nology is still very inefficient and the vest can 
drain power cells very quickly. 


Corondexx to mate with a small energy generator. 
It's kind of heavy, but it takes far longer for it to run 
out of power. My only worry is that one of these 
days, the power coupling will take a hit and cause 
an explosive overload. 


Camo Armor 


As a form of passive defense, this lightweight 
type of body-glove armor relies on boosting the 
wearer's chances of remaining hidden as the pri- 
mary means of survival. The camo field unit gener- 
ates a small holographic distortion field that mim- 
ics the nearby terrain (trees, brush, sand, and so 
forth). 


Camo Armor 
Model: Creshaldyne Industries Scout Armor 
Type: Light scout armor 
Cost: 1,500 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: 
Basic Suit: +1D physical, +2 energy for torso, arms and legs. 
Camo Field: + 1D tothe difficulty of search or Perception rolls 
for those trying to spot the wearer if the wearer remains 
motionless, 


> 


SAR 


x 


Homack/44:6:7:92/Bst* This is extremely good 
body armor for snipers. It doesn't really help you 
against attacks, but keeps you well-hidden. Back 
during my days with the Rebel Alliance, I had a suit 
of camo armor in my X-wing’s survival gear kit. 
When I got shot down over 
Atrivis, it helped me evade 
the Storm Commandos un- 
till could steal another ship. 


Vox/45:8:3:01/Hune A 
camo suit works well on 
unenhanced vision, but it 
doesn't provide much of an 
advantage over species that 
possess infravision. A good 
scanner operator will pick 
you off fairly quickly as well. 


Castaan Staad Armor 


Castaan Staad armor was 
designed for members of the 
Twi'lek warrior caste. 
Castaan Staad Armor is de- 
signed specifically to fit the 
burly Twi'lek warrior build. 
In general, Twi'lek warriors commission custom- 
tailored armor, though Castaan Armory manufac- 
tures a “generic” version for offworld sale. 

Castaan Staad armor resembles a blast vest 
that closes on one side, and it is fairly thin and 
allows for great flexibility. 


Castaan Staad Armor 
Model: Castaan Staad Armor 
Type: Custom-designed Twi'lek warrior armor 
Cost: 750 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: +1D to physical and +1D to energy, covers 
torso. 


War’ qi/41:5:3:88/Kase Castaan Staad armor never 
really impressed me. It was never meant to be a 
strong protection; Twi'lek warriors prefer to show 
off their courage rather than save their skins. The 
blast vest usually is very attractive and that's 
about it. 


Podono/41:5:8:02/Tale True enough, though the 
Castaan Staad design does have merit. | watched 
a Twi'lek warrior dance out of the way of several 
blaster shots and disarm his three 
opponents...with a vibrorapier. While there's no 
question that the Twi'lek possessed a great deal of 
skill, | don't think he'd have been able to move so 
quickly in bulkier armor. To my mind, not getting 
hit is better than withstanding an attack. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Creshaldyne Riot Armor 


A form of “early-warning system,” this armor 
employs aseries of infrared motion trackers which 
trigger an alarm when rapid motion indicative of 
an attack is encountered. 


Creshaldyne Riot Armor 
Model: Modified Creshaldyne Industries Riot Armor 
Type: Personal battle armor 


Basic Suit; +2D physical; +1D energy for torso (front and 
back) and legs (front). 
Infrared Motion Sensor Array: Has a range of 30 meters. An 
alarm is triggered when any mass over 10 kilograms is 
detected traveling in excess of 1 meter per second (this 
alarm can be audio or be run into a blast helmet for interior 
audio and visual. 
Jatras/41:2:9:03/Cane This isn’t bad armor, but it 
has one basic flaw: the tracking system alarm. The 
tracking system works, but imagine it’s dark, the 
alarm goes off and you now have an attacker 
within a 360-degree circle of you (and probably no 
more than 30 meters away). Not only that, but the 
alarm is not exactly quiet and can be heard if you 
are not wired in through a blast helmet. If you are 
wearing a blast helmet to minimize the noise of the 
alarm, you also minimize the rustling of leaves and 
outside sounds that identify where your attacker 
is. It’s a no-win situation. 


Heller/41:3:1:87/Nale Slice into the programming 
matrix and decrease the volume or better yet, 
remove the alarm speaker and hook the connec- 
tion leads to a standard blaster pistol “tingler” 
(found on old model DL-44s, to warn the shooter 
that the power cellis almost empty). Instead of the 
typical beep of the tracker alarm, you get a little 
“tingle.” 


Corellian 611 Combat Armor 


This Corellian suit is one of the most commonly 
available suits of armor, which makes it very 
popular among bounty hunters. The 611 protects 
fewer body areas than regular bounty hunter ar- 
mor, but is lighter allowing for greater maneuver- 
ability. 611 armor does not come with any on- 
board weapon systems, however. 

Despite its lack of armaments and antiquated 
power systems, it is much more common than 
other forms of body protection. The suit was 
originally designed for military engineers to pro- 
vide them with a modest defense and added 
strength while working on projects under fire. 

One flaw of this particular armor is the weight 
of the protective material. The armor is light 
enough to wear, but severely handicaps any ef- 
forts atswimming. The onboard environment seals 
are not watertight (due to a defective design pro- 


duced by a subcontracting firm) and allows fluid 
to contact the power system, creating a massive 
short-circuit. 


Corellian 611 Combat Armor 

Model: Corellian 611 Combat Armor 

Type: Personal battle armor 

Cost: 5,000 

Availability: 3, F 

Game Notes: Provides +2D to Strength for physical attacks, 

+1D for energy attacks. Covers head and torso. No Dexterity 

penalties. Add +10 to the difficulty number of any swimming 

rolls made while wearing this armor. 
Jatras/42:5:8:47/Nim* When | began my career as 
a bounty hunter, this combat armor was one of the 
cheapest suits | could afford. I figured I would just 
avoid any bounties on waterlogged planets and I'd 
be fine. Well, I still use this armor, although I also 
have a specific suit | use for underwater work. It’s 
a decent suit; Corellian armor definitely has its 
advantages and you won't be sorry...just pick one 
up at a second-hand shop and you'll be fine. 


Corellian HuntSuit 


Acommon type of bounty hunter armor similar 
to the Corellian PowerSuit. Typical modifications 
include a power cell recharger, short-range mo- 
tion sensors and storage systems for extra equip- 
ment and munitions. 


Corellian HuntSuit 
Model: Corellian HuntSuit 
Type: Personal battle armor 
Cost: 2,900 
Availability: 3, R 
Game Notes: 
Basic Suit; +2D physical; +1D energy for entire body; -1D to 
Dexterity and related skills. 
Power Suit: +1D to lifting skill. 
Sensor Pod: +1D to all search attempts made within 50 
meters. 


Red/39:7:5:98/Rale This is a simple suit the 
Corellians designed specifically for finding prey. 
Not only did most bounty hunters use it, but I saw 
more than one CorSec officer using this armor as 
protection when taking out a criminal. 


Belya’Nar/41;3:0:11/Pale Be careful with the sen- 
sor pod when you are tracking a target aboard a 
starship. | was chasing a mark aboard Kuari Prin- 
cess I] and he fled to the engineering crawlways; 
the ambient radiation in the area—while within 
safety tolerances—was sufficient to foul the sen- 
sor pod. Some kind of computer filtering may help, 
butit reduces the sensor’s speed and efficiency by 
as much as 50 percent. 


Coynite Battle Armor 


This bulky suit includes a helmet and is made 
from the stands of walt’sor plants, found only on 
Coyn. Despite the suit’s rather humble origins, it 
provides excellent protection against physical 
and energy attacks. 


Typically, Coynite battle armor is not available 
to offworlders, though it is in high demand among 
several shockboxers and other participants in 
high-contact sporting events. 


Illustration by Mike Vilardi 


Coynite Battle Armor 

Model: Ekkar Arms Coynite Battle Armor 

Type: Coynite personal battle armor 

Skill: Melee combat 

Cost: 150 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Add +2D protection from all physical and 

energy attacks. All Dexterity skills are penalized -1D. 
Dr. Ithar/42:2:5:66/Chae | think this is some of the 
most beautiful armor I've ever seen (which 
shouldn’t surprise anyone who knows me; | love 
Ekkar Arms’ work). If you are especially well- 
mannered and follow planetary rules while on 
Coyn, Ekkar Arms will allow you to watch their 
workers weave a suit out of the fibrous plants they 
grow nearby. It is simply amazing that this armor 
could protect so well. | was finally able to get a set 
of armor to take home with me and put with the 
rest of my collection; the Coynite are not stupid— 
they certainly made a larger profit on me than 
they do the natives, but the cheap “Coynite” suits 
of armor you find off-planet are badly replicated 
and do not give the protection the real ones do. Be 
very careful if you see Coynite battle armor out- 
side Coyn, someone's trying to swindle you. 


CT3 Concussion Helmet 


This helmet was designed more to protect the 
head from damage in bad falls or crashes. Also, 
this helmet could help prevent injury from ar- 
chaic firearms and missiles. It cannot protect 
against energy attacks, but when it was first devel- 
oped, blasters and other energy weapons were 
very rare. This helmet is very standard, designed 
to fit around the head. 


Concussion Helmet 
Model: Core World Arms CT3 
Type: Personal armor 
Seale: Character 
Cost: 375 
Availability: | 
Game Notes: Head: +2 to front and back from physical (non- 
energy) attacks, including crash and falling damage. 


CV14-B Concussion Vest 


Built to match the Core World Arms concus- 
sion helmet, the concussion vest also was built to 
last. Capable of protecting the torso from all physi- 
cal attacks, crashes and falls, the vest shows a lot 
of promise on today’s market, even if it weren't an 
antique. 


CV14-B Concussion Vest 

Model: Core World Arms CV14-B 

Type: Personal armor 

Scale: Character 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: Torso: +1D to front and back from physical 

(non-energy) attacks, including crash and falling damage. 
Pyjam/39:2:4:34/Crle Although it may be hard to 
believe, both the antique concussion vest and 
helmet are some of the most popular items in my 
second-hand store. For parents whose children 
are beginning to get antsy to go off on a swoop or 
other dangerous conveyance, this is probably the 
best investment you can make for your kid. You 
can usually cut a deal too—they aren't considered 
collector's items unless they have some Old Re- 
public insignia on them. Anyone who's a backwa- 
ter racer would benefit from grabbing this armor. 


Terelya/39:6:0:99/Deve Be careful when using 
material this old, though. Most Old Republic-era 
military surplus is extremely fragile and not ca- 
pable of withstanding much jostling. Trusting a 
blast concussion helmet to protect you when it is 
webbed with micro-fractures can cost you your 
life. These are fine for collectors, but | wouldn't 
bet my life on ‘em. 


illustration by David Plunkett 


Doubler Suit 


A miniaturized version of a portable, three- 
dimensional holovid recorder mated with a di- 
rected projector, the doubler suit creates a life- 
size, holographic image of the wearer. For proper 
operation, the person to be “doubled” must be 
recorded for one hour. Then, the projection sys- 
tem is tied into a portable computer with the 
unique “doubler” software. This program creates 
a “holo-composite” of the target, enabling the 
computer to blend any of the existing holos for 
wholly new but convincing images. 

When used in the field, the wearer has a bodysuit 


lined with thousands of microsensors. The 
microsensors relay movement data to the holo- 
graphic projector's computer brain. The projec- 
tor then creates a virtually identical holographic 
image that is transmitted through the 
holoprojector. Indistinguishable from the original 
at long range, as one gets closer to the double, it 
is easy to determine that this is a projected holo- 
graphic image. The double allows the hunter to 
draw enemy fire with minimal exposure. This is 
especially useful in areas where the exact location 
of an opponent cannot easily be ascertained due 
to intervening terrain and obstacles. 


Doubler Suit 
Model: Modified Corellidyne Holographic Projector Dou- 
bler Suit 
Type: Human-sized three-dimensional imaging system 
Skill: Computer programming/repair (Difficult difficulty to 
operate doubler-imaging application; if the programming 
roll fails, the flaws will immediately evidence themselves 
the first time the doubler image is used. 
Cost: 30,000 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: Once programmed, an Easy Mechanical roll 
will allow projection of a lifelike image duplicating the 
character. The image can be projected in any direction, up 
to 10 meters away. The operating character should se- 
cretly inform the gamemaster of attempts to project the 
holo image, specifying its location and distance relative to 
the true individual. If a successful roll is made, all others 
will see the apparent image of the original character pro- 
jected as previously indicated. Viewers must make a Very 
Difficult Perception or search roll to discover the true 
nature of the image (at a range of 50 meters of more; for 
every ten meters closer to the target, reduce the difficulty 
by one level). 


Bantha/41:8:4:48/Chae | think this is one of those 
technological advances that should have just been 
allowed to crawl off the drawing board and die. 
For 30,000 credits, you can make an image of 
someone or yourself to “draw away enemy fire.” 
What good is that going to do when the doubler 
doesn’t “die?” And if they get close enough, they'll 
figure out it's a fake anyway. To be honest, I don’t 
think it's worth it, even if it was half that price. | 
wouldn’t buy one. 


Gunman/41:8:6:09/Elre Don’t discount the use- 
fulness of a good doubler suit. A squad of Ailon 
Nova Guardsmen fooled my unit's scouts by equip- 
ping each troop with a doubler suit (that they 
presumably captured or were issued by the Em- 
pire). They activated the units while on the march, 
making it appear to us that their understrength 
unit was in fact a full platoon. Remember: any tool 
can give you an advantage if used properly. 


Dragon Armor 
This suit was designed by the SoroSuub corpo- 
ration for use by SoroSuub security forces and 
Sullustan military forces. The armor is best suited 
to dealing with poorly armored opponents and 


vehicles. Because most of its weapons do damage 
to large areas, the armor is especially good at 
dealing with larger numbers of opponents. Al- 
though the suit was built with the Sullustan phy- 
sique in mind, other humanoids can fit into the 
power suit with a little discomfort. 

Unfortunately for the SoroSuub Corporation, 
which had invested a good deal of money and 
effort into the project, the prototype suit and all 
copies of the plan disappeared at about the same 
time SoroSuub allied with the Empire. 


Dragon Armor 
Model: SoroSuub NLZ5-11 Dragon 
Type: Medium power armor 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Provides +3D to Strength for physical attacks, +2D 
for energy attacks, -2D to Dexterity and all related skills. 
Covers head, torso, arms and legs. 
Heaviness: Due to this suit's weight, the skills hide, sneak 
and swimming cannot be used while wearing this armor. 
Strength: Servos in the armor provide +1D Strength bonus 
for lifting skill rolls and melee and brawling damage. 
Speed: Due to the bulk of the armor, the wearer's Speed is 
reduced to 7. 
Sensors: Provides 180-degree vision, macrobinocular vi- 
sion and a mini-targeting computer. Provides +2D to Per- 
ception and search rolls. Contains a multi-frequency target- 
ing and acquisition system (MFTAS) which gives +1D to all 
ranged weapon skill rolls against targeting at medium and 
long ranges. 
Body Glove: A climate-controlled body glove incorporates 
additional heating elements to allow comfortable opera- 
tion in moderately hot and extremely cold climates. 
Defensive Blaster: 3D damage, uses armor weapons skill, 
ranges: 3-4/8/12, mounted 
alongside helmet. 
Twin Flamers: 5D damage 
(fire-linked), uses armor 
weapons skill, creates cone 
one meter wide, variable one 
tofive meters long, mounted 
on left forearm armor. 
Mini-Missile Launcher: 5D 
damage, uses missile weap- 
ons skill, ranges: 3-40/120/ 
400, mounted on shoulder 
armor. 
Sealed Enviro-Filter: Filter 
system can block out harm- 
ful molecules, or the suit can 
completely seal, drawing 
upon a two-hour internal 
supply of oxygen. 
Lowwel/38:9:2:84/Sule 
Some associates of mine 
are actually the group 
who found the 
prototype...we broke into 
an abandoned SoroSuub 
warehouse and found 
crates and crates of old 
weapons and obsolete 
designs that had been 


packed away. We also found the Dragon. We're 
kind of waiting for the remaining board members 
of SoroSuub to offer us more money for the suit 
and some other things we obtained. We also want 
a couple of suits for ourselves. The suit itself is 
nice, with a launcher, flamers, blasters, really 
good protection. Problem is, it’s a bit small for 
most humans. We'll wait until they make special 
suits designed for us, then we’)) make the deal. 


Dura-Armor 


Dura-armor had an important role in by-gone 
days during battles. While not very usable in 
terms of flexibility, it protected users from crashes 
and falls. A user could wear the armor while 
seated in an armed vehicle, using the vehicles 
computers to replace his own diminished senses 
and thus be protected in case the worse occurred. 


Dura-Armor 

Model: Core World Arms 

Type: Impact-resistant molded armor 

Scale: Character 

Cost: 8,000 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Head, torso, arms, legs: +2D to all physical 

(non-energy) attacks; +2D to all energy attacks; -2D penalty 

to all Dexterity and Perception attribute and skill checks, 
Kris/44:3:9:05/Erie The only use this armor had 
was in vehicle combat, particularly among Old 
Republic ground troops. Unfortunately, the ar- 
mor is so bulky that if you actually had to run 
anywhere, you were as good as vaped. Oh, small- 
time terrorists and some gangs still get these old 
suits to use when they need to runatruck through 
some lines or past enemy gangs. | suppose they're 
still fairly usable. 


Espo Armor 


The standard Espo uniform is a brown padded 
jumpsuit with a visored helmet. This suit is in- 
tended to protect more against injuries common 
to brawls; the armor provides almost no protec- 
tion from blaster bolts. The helmet is geared more 
toward physical impacts than protection from 
energy weapons and includes a retractable breath 
filter, retractable headset comlink and hearing 
protection headphones. 


Espo Armor 

Model: Ayelixe/Krongbing Textiles blast vest and blast 

helmet 

Type: Personal armor 

Scale: Character 

Cost: 200 (vest), 200 (helmet) 

Availability: Not for sale 

Protection: Blast Helmet(+1 energy, +1D physical), blast 

vest (+1 energy, +1D physical, -1 Dexterity and related skills) 
Trenton/43:2:3:89/Kuae I was in the Corporate 
Sector when the Espos were still on top of their 
game, and I remember the Ayelixe/Krongbing Tex- 
tiles armor. It wasn’t that great—it was certainly 


tration by Mike Vilardi 


well suited for easy details like clearing out some 
drunks in a local cantina—but it doesn’t handle 
damage well. A well-placed blaster shot will punch 
through it without a problem (especially when 
you consider how powerful some weapons are 
today). 


Espo Riot Armor 


The Corporate Sector Authority's heavy com- 
bat armor for Espo forces, this form of riot gear is 
made ofa tight-fitting, climate-controlled suit with 
a 16-piece armored shell. The shell pieces are 
made of woven poly-ceramics and provide excel- 
lent physical protection and respectable protec- 
tion from energy blasts. 


Espo Riot Armor 
Model: Authority Riot Armor 
Type: Blast armor 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: X 
Protection: Helmet: blast helmet with visor +1D from all 
energy attacks, +2D from all physical attacks; all other 
areas: +2 from energy attacks, +1D+2 from physical attacks, 
-2 from Dexterity and all Dexterity-related actions 


Vron/40:2:9:59/Bete The CSA Espos were easily 
identified by their armor, and within the Corpo- 
rate Sector they invoked almost as much fear as 


the Imperial Stormtrooper. Ever since the CSA 
shut down its borders, you don’t see Espo armor 
much, but the design was exceedingly good. 


Flex-Armor 


Flex-armor was designed to allow more move- 
ment than dura-armor. In addition, it could also be 
modified to increase protection against physical 
attacks. Though this did leave the suit defenseless 
against energy attacks, the Old Republic troops 
that originally wore flex-armor didn't seem terri- 
bly concerned; most battles leaned more towards 
physical weapons (slugthrowers, swords, and so 
on) than energy weapons. As a result, flex-armor 
remained popular until the energy-warfare and 
duraplas armor became more common. 


Flex-Armor 

Model: Drolan Plasteel TY! flex-armor 

Type: Personal armor 

Scale: Character 

Cost: 2,000 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Head, torso, arms, legs: +1 Dtoall physical and 

energy attacks; -1D penalty to all Dexterity attribute and 

skill checks. 

Possible Modifications; Flex-armor can be reinforced with 

steel wire or mesh, thereby increasing its protection to +2D 

against physical strikes. Defense against energy attacks, 

however, is forfeited in the process. This alteration re- 

quires a Moderate armor repair roll and one day of time 
Pyjam/40:9:8:20/Crle Flex-armor is probably the 
least popular of the old Sith War designs that are 
bought up today. The only people who collect 
them are true military history buffs. They were 
surprisingly durable bodysuits and many still func- 
tion, but typically flex-armor suits were modified 
by the previous owners. I've found a few suits that 
protect much better than such ancient armor 
should be able to. 


Gladiator Armor 


For many years, the Soruus system's provincial 
government sentenced criminals to fight to the 
death in immense arenas for public sport. Min- 
Dal's operational prototypes for this model armor 
were tested in these gladiatorial contests. Although 
arena security was good and has been increased— 
enough to prevent combatants from breaking from 
custody and harming the spectators—sabotage 
and a quick diversion gave the criminals wearing 
these suits an opportunity to escape. Once free, 
the small group committed atrocious crimes be- 
fore the Empire stepped in to hunt and destroy 
most of them. 

Public outcry against the incident forced Min- 
Dal to cancel their armor program. One of the 
criminals, Morana Fal, evaded capture with two 
suits: her own and one from a fallen comrade. 
Currently there is a reward of 10,000 credits for 
her capture and 3,000 for each intact suit returned 
to the Min-Dal corporation. 


Gladiator Armor 

Model: Min-Dal JX4 Gladiator Prototype 

Type: Personal battle armor 

Cost: Not available for sale 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Notes: 

Armor: Provides +2D to Strength for physical attacks, +1D 

for energy attacks. Covers head, torso and arms. No Dexter- 

ity penalties. 

Conner Net Gun: Stun damage, damage 5D if electrical 

charge is released, uses missile weapons skill, ranges: 3-10/ 

19/25, mounted on left forearm armor. 

Vibro-Shiv: STR+1D damage, retracts into right gauntlet. 

Jet Pack: Has a Move of 100 meters horizontally, 70 meters 

vertically. Uses jet pack operation skill, base difficulty is 

Easy, modified by obstacles. Has 10 charges, can expend up 

to two per round. 
Staven/44:2:3:49/Rode | followed the bounty on 
Morana Fal for almost a year. I closed in on her 
near her home planet of Ord Mantell. When | 
finally confronted her on the waterfront, she turned 
and used this armor to great effect. | shot at her, 
but my blaster bolts were successfully deflected 
long enough for her to bring her heavy blaster 
pistol to bear. She used a jet pack to close in so she 
could fight me hand-to-hand. I knew after a few 
moments that she meant to keep her armor and 
she had the power to do it. | backed off and let her 
go. Catching her wasn't worth 10,000 credits—the 
bounty wouldn't begin to cover my medical ex- 
penses. 


Trityn/44:3:9:74/Bybe Actually, she wasn’t that 
hard to take out. She liked to frequent waterfront 
areas. | just held out until she fired her conner net 
gun (one ofher favorite weapons) which! promptly 
deflected into water. The resulting short-circuit 
took her down and I waltzed away 10,000 credits 
richer. 


Heavy Radiation Powersuit 


The HR-211 is a reusable work suit, capable of 
providing short-term protection (up to one hour) 
from lethal levels of heat and radiation. The versa- 
tile chest-mounted sensor pod features a heads- 
up display, as well as full audio- and video-record- 
ing capabilities. The helmet features a multi-band 
civilian comlink and a retractable blast visor. The 
suit has a six-hour power supply and 12 hours of 
oxygen. The suit must be completely decontami- 
nated prior to recharging. 


Heavy Radiation Powersuit 
Model: Nova-Tech HR-211 Powersuit 
Type: High radiation space powersuit 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: 3,000 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Suit provides +2D physical and energy, -1D to Dex- 
terity and related skills. Move: 3 (in gravity). 
BoosterJets; Detachable booster jets have fuel for 10 bursts, 
with a speed of Space 1 and 1D maneuverability. 


Sensors; The suit is equipped with a sensor pod with a 
maximum range of 100 meters; add +1D to the operator's 
Sensors skill. 

Equipment: Helmet-mounted comlink, utility pouches, 50 
meter lifeline, shoulder-mounted beam light, fusion cutter 
(5D), and magnetic traction boots. 


Meydhu/41:8:2:34/Tine This is another one of 
those pieces of equipment that you don’t really 
worry about until it’s too late. Sooner or later, 
there’s going to bearadiation crisis, either aboard 
ship, on a planet or out in space. The day it 
happens, you'll be kicking yourself for not think- 
ing of it. It also protects against heat, which is 
valuable when you have to do emergency repairs 
near a star. 


Hogar/41:8:6:21/Kese The air filters on this type 
of unit require replacement after every 50 hours of 
use. Otherwise, you'll end up sucking in contami- 
nated air and regretting it. | also found that the 
onboard climate control computer can sometimes 
be fooled unless a thin sheet of myoflex plastic is 
adhered to the main temperature sensor. This 
tricks the suit into thinking the temperature is 
higher than it actually is and kicks in the cooling 
unit. (Ifyou don't have myoflex, try synthskin...it’ll 
work in a pinch.) 


Juggernaut Armor 


Juggernaut armor was originally developed 
many years ago for use by large mercenary and 
militia forces that required additional heavy fire- 
power for infantry support without additional 
manpower. The incredible cost of integrating all 
the different weapons, targeting and environmen- 
tal systems led to the Cozzell Corporation's deci- 
sion to terminate the project. 


Juggernaut Armor 
Model: Cozzell Juggernaut 510 Combat Power Armor 
Type: Assault power armor 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Provides +3D to Strength for physical attacks, +3D to 
energy attacks; -3D to Dexterity and related skills. Covers 
head, torso, arms and legs. 
Heaviness: Due to this suit's weight, the skills hide, sneak 
and swimming cannot be used while wearing this armor. 
Strength: Servos in the armor provide a +3D Strength Bonus 
for lifting skill rolls and melee and brawling damage. 
Speed: Due to the bulk of the armor, the wearer's Speed is 
reduced to 5. 
Sensors: Provides 180-degree vision, macrobinocular vi- 
sion, mini-targeting computer. Provides +2D to Perception 
and search rolls. Contains a multi-frequency targeting and 
acquisition system (MFTAS) which gives +1D to all ranged 
weapon skill rolls at medium and long ranges. 
Body Glove: A climate-controlled body glove incorporates 
additional heating and cooling elements to allow comfort- 
able operation in moderately hot and extremely cold cli- 
mates. 
Medium Repeating Blaster: 7D damage, uses armor weapons 
skill, ranges: 3-50/120/300, hand held with braces and 


ay tLe | 


sy $ 
hiia] 
i, bi 


targeting computer interface along right forearm armor, 
Grenade Launcher: 5D damage, uses missile weapons skill, 
ranges: 1-250/350/500, mounted on left shoulder. 
Retractable Claws; STR+2D damage, mounted in left gaunt- 
let. 
“Credman”/40:9:2:38/Ind* Looking at the plans 
for this armor, I'd say that it would've been really 
interesting to see just how much it could do, but 
I can certainly see why Cozzell canceled it. It is so 
bulky and clumsy that it should be fairly easy to 
dodge the weaponry. Still, it would require heavy 
artillery to take 
someone wearing 
Juggernaut armor 
down. 


Gunman/40:9:3:09/ 
Elre My old unit ac- 
tually had a few pro- 
duction model Jug- 
gernaut suits; ap- 
parently, one of the 
Cozzel designers— 
a Corellian named 
Sarvel Tal-Oldra— 
decided he didn't 
like having his 
project terminated 
and began custom 
manufacturing Jug- 
gernauts at Doc’s 
old outlaw tech 
base in the Corpo- 
rate Sector. The ar- 
mor was indeed 
slow, but the weap- 
onry was extremely efficient. The main flaw is the 
power transfer routing conduits along the back— 
they aren’t well armored and a few good hits from 
a blaster will knock out the grenade launcher and 
the repeating blaster. Overall, though, the Jugger- 
naut is an excellent suit. If you have the funds, | 
recommend you look Tal-Oldra up. 


FS 


Wustration by Doug Shuler 


Koromondain PDS, Inc Protective Vest 


Commonly referred to as bounty hunter insur- 
ance, this protective vest is specifically designed 
to protect the wearer from sudden attacks from 
unexpected quarters (and dubious friends in dark 
places). 


Koromondain PDS, Inc Protective Vest 
Model: Modified Koromondain PDS, Inc. Mk 45 Protective 
Vest 
Type: Protective vest 
Cost: 250 
Availability: 1 
Game Notes: +1D+2 from physical; +2 from energy attacks 
to torso front and back. 

Kastovar/39:5:5:91/Hune | typically wear a 
Koromondain vest over some other form of body 
armor; it takes the brunt of an attack and allows 


the layer of armor underneath to take the rest. 


Helgred/39:6:1:12/Tele The vest also has one 
added benefit: pockets. Not only does it help 
block an attack, it also makes a good tactical 
harness. 


Leviathan Armor 


The Mon Calamari designed this suit for a se- 
cret squad of commandos which harassed Impe- 
rial aquatic installations on planets sympathetic 
to the Rebel Alliance. Its weapons are specially 
designed for underwater combat against elite Im- 
perial aquatic units. Like Mon Calamari starships, 
each suit of Leviathan power armor is unique—a 
work of art as well as a functional weapon. Each 
suit is tailor fitted to its user—new suits must be 
specially commissioned. 

The Leviathan suit is not pressurized and does 
not carry any air tanks, since the Mon Calamari 
are amphibious and can withstand deep-sea pres- 
sures, 


Leviathan Armor 
Model: Mon Calamari Leviathan Power Armor 
Type: Assault power armor 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Provides +3D to Strength for physical attacks, +3D to 
energy attacks; -1D to Dexterity and related skills under 
water, -3D to Dexterity and related skills on land. Covers 
head, torso, arms and legs. 
Customized: lf worn by someone other than its owner add 
an additional -1D to the Dexterity penalty. 
Heaviness; Due to this suit’s weight, the skills hide, sneak 
and running cannot be used while wearing this armor on 
land. 
Strength: Servos in the armor provide a +3D Strength bonus 
for liftingskill rolls and me- 
lee añd brawling damage. 
Speed: Due to the bulk of the 
armor, the wearer's Speed is 
reduced to 5 while on land. 
Special underwater propul- 
sion unites in the leg armor 
give the wearer a Speed of 15 
while swimming under wa- 
ter. 
Sensors: Provides 180 degree 
vision, macrobinocular vi- 
sion, mini targeting com- 
puter, Gives +2D to Percep- 
tion and search rolls. Con- 
tains a multi-frequency tar- 
geting and acquisition sys- 
tem (MFTAS) which gives 
+1D to all ranged weapon 
skill rolls against targets at 
medium and long ranges. 
The targeting system also 
allows torpedoes to lock on 
and adjust course to follow 
moving targets. Includes spe- 
cial sonar gear. Thus this 
armor is designed to deal 
with deep waters where light 


Waustranon by Jerry DeCrotie 


is absent. 

Body Glove; A climate-controlled body glove incorporates 
additional heating and cooling elements to allow comfort- 
able operation in moderately hot and extremely cold cli- 
mates. 

Duo-Flechette Rifle: 5D damage, uses armor weapons skill, 
ranges: 3—10/30/60, mounted on right forearm armor. 
Mint-Torpedo Launcher: 6D damage, uses missile weapons 
skill, ranges: 3-30/120/350, mounted in shoulder armor. 


Red/43:2:8:70/Care This armor is beautiful, but is 
really impractical for anyone other than the Mon 
Calamari or other aquatic species. For them, the 
suit works with their swimming, so they can use 
speed and strength to defeat enemies. | think 
anyone else would have to fight the suit for con- 
trol, because their swimming ability isn’t as good. 


Shol’Arma/43:5:1:21/Mane It’s true: unless you 
are a competition-grade swimmer and can match 
Mon Cals in the water, you'll have a hard time with 
the Leviathan. To combat this problem, try having 
an astromech take a holo of you swimming. The 
droid can probably map your movements and 
feed them into the Leviathan’s motion control 
programming and make it possible for you to use 
the armor. 


Red/43:5:8:00/Care Don’t forget: it isn’t pressur- 
ized and doesn't contain atmosphere. Upgrading 
the Leviathan to store a Type | atmosphere is 
possible, but will cost you well over 20,000 cred- 
its. 


Link Armor 


Link armor was designed by linking small insu- 
lated rings together to form a heavy protective 
covering capable of protecting against energy 
attacks as well as physical. Centuries ago, Jedi 
Knights commonly wore this type of armor into 
battle. The suit was designed to link into another, 
larger suit, thus giving more physical protection, 
though the resulting armor was less capable of 
preventing injury from energy attacks. The double- 
suit modification is also very bulky and tends to 
keep the wearer from moving quickly. 


Link Armor 
Model: ProTech SupraLink 
Type: Link armor 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 500 
Availability: | 
Game Notes: Head, torso, arms, legs: +1D to all physical 
(non-energy) attacks; +2 to all energy attacks; -1D penalty 
to all Dexterity attribute and skill checks. 
Possible Modifications: Characters may opt to create twin- 
layer link armor by weaving two suits (one slightly larger 
than the other) together. The modification changes the 
armor's statistics to the following: +1D+2 to all physical 
attacks; +1D to all energy attacks; -2D to all Dexterity 
attribute and skill checks. The alteration requires a Diffi- 
cult armor repair roll, 550 credits, and one week of work. 


Kris/42:8:9:47/Erie The “double suit” modifica- 
tion of link armor was one of the most interesting 


innovation that the now- 
defunct ProTech ever 
came up with. I'm in the 
process of modifying 
modern duraplas into 
a form of link armor 
that may provide ad- 
ditional protection 
against energy weap- 
ons. Anyone inter- 
ested in field testing 
the design can con- 
tact me at the Ace of 
Sabers. 


Malgon Armor 


This rare suit was 
designed for service in 
or near larger power 
plants, chemical factories 
and other installations 
where explosives and 
blasters could cause im- 
mense fires. The original 
suit was designed with 
chemical nozzles along 
the arms to shoot fire- 
suppressant chemi- 
cals. 

Due to an Imperial “request,” all production of 
this armor was halted and most known suits were 
recalled. No reason was given by the Empire for 
recall of the suit. A handful of suits were never 
turned in and found their way to the black market, 
where the fire suppressant chemical system was 
modified to a flame projector weapon. 


Malgon Armor 
Model: Modified X5 Malgon Armor 
Type: Light power armor 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Provides +2D to Strength for physical attacks, +2D 
for energy attacks; -2D to Dexterity and related skills. Cov- 
ers head, torso, arms and legs. 
Heaviness: Due to the suit's weight, the skills hide, sneak 
and swimming cannot be used while wearing this armor. 
Strength: Servos in the arms and torsos provide a +1D 
Strength bonus for /ifting skill rolls and melee and brawling 
damage. 
Sensors: The helmet is equipped with a sensor pod which 
provides a +1D bonus to search. 
Flame Projectors: 5D damage, uses armor weapons skill, 
creates cone one meter wide, variable one to five meters 
long. One projector is mounted on each arm. 


Dykara/45:3:9:58/Piie There was always a rumor 
running around that the Empire let a certain 
amount of Malgon suits escape from the factory. It 
was also said that they were the ones who in- 
vented the modification to make the flame projec- 


Illustration by Christina Waid 


Z 
os OTe 
hs 


tor. Apparently, the “stolen” suits were part of an 
ISB field test of a new weapons system. After a 
handful of crooks got some suits of Malgon armor, 
they went on a rampage (after which the Empire 
“restored the peace” and reclaimed the suits). 


Merr-Sonn Armored Spacesuit 


The Superior is a simpler armored space suit 
than spacetrooper armor, but more than adequate 
to most boarder’s needs. The suit has 25 hours of 
atmosphere, a heating unit, waste unit, and on- 
board food supplements, is self-patching, and in- 
cludes a comlink, while providing decent protec- 
tion against blaster fire. The suit includes a rocket 
pack. 


illustration by Storn Cook 


Merr-Sonn Armored Spacesuit 

Model: Merr-Sonn Weapons Superior Boarding Armor 

Type: Armored space suit 

Cost: 10,000 credits 

Availability: 2, X 

Game Notes: 

Armor: Provides +2D versus energy, +1D versus physical 

damage; -1D from Dexterity and related skills, Holds 25 

hours worth of atmosphere. 

Rocket Pack: Suit includes a rocket pack; Space Move: 1, 

uses rocket pack operation. 
Lowwel/42:9:5:67/Care Merr-Sonn makes some 
real good boarding armor. Trust me, it’s worth 
paying out the ten thousand creds and getting a 
decent suit rather than paying less and risking a 
blown seal. This space suit has everything—food, 
waste disposal, things you really need if you're EV 
for long periods of time. In my business, we're out 
of our ship often enough that the amenities or the 
Superior boarding armor make a tough job infi- 
nitely more bearable. I'd recommend this suit to 
anyone, whether they're a pirate or a dock loader. 


Gunman/42:9:8:02/Elre One interesting design 
feature of the Superior involves the rocket pack. If 
you run out of fuel, you can vent some atmosphere 
gasses into the engine’s ignition chamber, allow- 
ing limited movement...at the expense of your air. 
Just be very careful: it is possible to over-vent into 
the rocket pack, which causes a pretty impressive 
explosion. 


Nemesis Armor 


The Nemesis was designed for use by corpo- 
rate security forces during the Old Republic, and 
was commonly found in the militia of planets or 
sectors controlled by corporations. Most of the 
suits were destroyed in conflicts during the final 
years of the Old Republic. Nemesis armor has 
become popular with the few individuals with 
intact suits. Arms dealers believe that fewer than 
six of these suits remain operational. Most of 
these suits are in the hands of powerful bounty 
hunters or elite mercenaries, though a few hun- 
dred “knockoff” designs—of excellent quality— 
were constructed by an unknown outlaw tech 
several years ago. 


Nemesis Armor 
Model: Mili-Corp DZ 17X Nemesis 
Type: Medium power armor 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: 
Armor: +3D to Strength for physical attacks, +2D for energy 
attacks; -2D to Dexterity and related skills. Covers head, 
torso, arms and legs. 
Heaviness; Due to this suit's weight, the skills hide, sneak 
and swimming cannot be used while wearing this armor. 
Strength: Servos in the armor provide a +1D Strength bonus 
for lifting skill rolls and melee and brawling damage. 
Speed: Due to the bulk of the armor, the wearer's Speed is 
reduced to 7. 


Sensors: Provides 180 degree vision, macrobinocular vi- 
sion, mini-targeting computer. Provides +2D to Perception 
and search rolls. Contains a multi-frequency targeting and 
acquisition system (MFTAS) which gives +1D to all ranged 
weapon skill rolls against targets at medium and long 
ranges. 
DEMP Gun: 3D ionization damage, uses armor weapons skill, 
ranges: 3-4/8/12, mounted on left forearm armor. 
Light Repeating Blaster: 6D damage, uses armor weapons 
skill, ranges: 3-50/120/300, mounted on right forearm ar- 
mor. 
Body Glove; A climate-controlled body glove incorporates 
additional heating and cooling elements to allow comfort- 
able operation in moderately hot and extremely cold cli- 
mates. 
Staven/39:2:3:83/Zele The Nemesis was an awe- 
some set of armor. It had powerful weaponry and 
good sensory equipment. Not only that, but it had 
a defense against droids, which I always thought 
every bounty hunter, smuggler and merc should 
have. | think all of the original Nemesis suits are 
now gone, but I’ve heard rumor that a new, similar 
suit is going to be produced by a band of ex- 
Imperial scientists out near Kal’Shebbol. 


Nova-Tech Powersuit 


A basic powersuit, the Nova-Tech design is 
popular everywhere: it has a good price for a solid 
set of armor and weapons to boot. Though mar- 
keted as “protection against asteroids,” the blaster 
cannon is often used for illegal applications. 


Nova-Tech Powersuit 

Model: Nova-Tech Powersuit 

Type: Space powersuit 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Powersuit operation 

Cost: 1,000 credits 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: 

Armor: Suit provides +2D energy, +3D physical; maneuver- 

ability 1D, space 1. 

Weapon: blaster cannon (fire control 1D, damage 5D). 
Narseri/41:9:8:54/Pire The basic blaster cannon 
on the power suit isn’t all that great for combat 
applications. | upgraded my powersuit with a 
medium repeating blaster and augmented the basic 
suit with movement servos on the legs and arms 
(which make me alittle quicker than the bulky suit 
would otherwise indicate). Just make sure that 
you make the power demands of your suit modifi- 
cations fairly light; the internal circuitry is actu- 
ally very delicate and placing too high a demand 
on the system may cause a burn-out. 


Reflect Body Glove 


A lightweight modification of a standard envi- 
ronmental body suit used to control body heat 
and cooling. Typically worn next to the skin, this 
wraparound synthetic covering is impregnated 
with a combination of reflective materials that 
help abate the blast effects of energy weapons. It 
is intended for use as a readily disposable system, 


capable of absorbing a limited amount of damage 
before being discarded. 


Reflect Body Glove 

Model: Syncronics ENVC-370 Glove 

Type: Protective energy displacement suit 

Cost: 4,000 

Availability: 3, X 

Game Notes: This suit adds +1D to a character's Strength 

when resisting damage from blaster attacks as long as the 

person hit was at the weapon's medium or long range 

(blaster bolts disperse slightly over distance and the minor 

dispersal at medium and long range makes blaster bolts 

much easier for the suit to affect). The suit can absorb five 

blasts before being destroyed. If the wearer of the suit is 

wounded (or worse) as a result of an energy blaster, the suit 

is also destroyed, 
Uulshanti/39:4:5:09/Care | wouldn't rely on the 
ENVC-370 to withstand more than a couple of 
blaster shots. While factory specs claim it can take 
five hits, that is somewhat inaccurate. The -370 
can take five hits in different locations. More than 
one hit to the center of the chest, for example, and 
you're as good as vaped. 


Darry/41:9:3:48/Umge A reflect body glove makes 
for excellent protection beneath additional ar- 
mor. Should someone get lucky and punch a shot 
through your outer armor, you'll have a thin, 
lightweight layer of protection underneath. 


Riot Shield 


This is a one-meter-long shield made of layered 
metal and one-way-mirrored transparisteel. It has 
a small notch to fit the muzzle of a blaster. It has 
a simple handle with a stud to activate a fairly 
potent stun charge. 


Riot Shield 
Model: Drearian Defense Activv! Riot Shield 
Type: Riot shield 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Melee parry 
Cost: 500 credits 
Availability: 2, R 
Difficulty: Easy 
Damage: 4D (stun) 


Game notes: If the character makes the skill roll, the user 
has used the shield to block incoming attacks on one facing. 
The shield has a Strength of 4D. If used as a melee weapon, 
it causes STR+2 damage as well as 4D stun damage. Using 
the firing notch adds one level to the difficulty of firing 
blasters, but the character is protected by the shield. The 
stun charge lasts for one hour of consecutive use. 
Fotakex/39:8:9:34/Ette This was a great line of 
defense for Corporate Authority and has under- 
gone a resurgence in popularity as of late—the 
New Republic has adopted a modified version of 
the Drearian Defense riot shield. | once was a 
member of the Espos and I loved my riot shield. It 
was very lightweight, very convenient and you felt 
safe even when advancing against a mob of angry, 
armed citizens. The New Republic's law-enforce- 
ment troops will definitely appreciate these fine 
tools. 


SeaScape Diving Suit 

The diving suit is a flexible body-cover which 
provides an internal atmosphere. The air tanks 
contain enough air for six hours of continuous 
use, and the reinforced ribbing and plates allows 
dives to 200 meters. There is a comlink in the 
helmet with a range of two kilometers. Swimming 
rolls are not necessary as long as the diver is not 
engaged in activities other than swimming or 
attempting complex underwater movements. 


There are countless planets out there with oceans, 
seas and lakes. The best way to get one is to go to 
a couple of black market dealers at places where 
diving suits are rare...like a desert planet or in a 
city away from water—that's where you get the 
best prices. A guy on Tatooine actually paid me to 
take one off his hands. 


Smasher Armor 


This battle armor was originally designed for 
private security personnel, but has become a 
favorite of those hunters who are not afraid of 
getting up close and personal. The addition of 
numerous micro-servos has greatly boosted the 
wearer's potential to inflict serious physical in- 
jury. 

Smasher Armor 

Model: Modified Locris Syndicates Personal Protection 

Suit 

Type: Personal battle armor 


Cost: 1,250 
Availability: 3 


ij ernie F 


* 7 
we Siva) 
SAN 


Game Notes: 

Basic Suit: +1D physical and energy. 

Servo Enhancers: +2D to brawling, climbing/jumping, lifting, 

and damage in Strength-related attacks. 
Yideg/44:3:4:88/Orde It's not just hunters who 
are getting a thrill wearing these Smasher. Some 
brawlers are making a lot of money in them. The 
brawler goes into his local cantina, and while he 
picks a fight, somebody—his partner, posing as 
an innocent bystander—lays down bets on his 
man. The brawler wins and they split the credits 
fifty-fifty. It’s not a bad little operation, but you 
won't survive if the locals get a whiff of what's 
really going on. 


er 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


SeaScape Diving Suit 
Model: SeaScape Aquasuit (Hardshell model) 
Type: heavy diving suit 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Swimming 
Cost: 400 
Availability: 1 in coastal areas, 2 elsewhere 
Game Notes: The reinforced ribbing adds 2 pips to Strength 
code for damage purposes only. Only reduces Dexterity 
codes on land. The flippers and on-board propulsion unit 
add 2D to the user's swimming skill and allow an underwa- 
ter Move rate of 12. 


Vron/42:2:3:58/Tyne A lot of people pass over 
this suit without a second thought. | mean, when 
are you going to use it? Trust me, someday, you 
will need a good dive suit. One of the best places 
to hide anything is in underwater—it fouls sen- 
sors and makes movement and combat difficult. 


Stalker Armor 


This suit was designed by Salus Corporation on 
Rodia for specific use as bounty hunter armor. 
The suit has since gained much respect in the 
bounty hunter community because of its versatil- 
ity. Two configurations are available—one tai- 
lored to comfortably fit Rodians and another de- 
signed to fit most generic humanoid body types. 


Stalker Armor 
Model: Salus Corp Stalker Armor 
Type: Personal body armor 
Cost: 8,000 
Availability: 3, R 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Provides +2D to Strength for physical attacks, +2D 
for energy attacks. Covers head, torso, arms, and legs. -2D 
to Dexterity and related skills. 
Heaviness: Due to the suit's weight, the skills hide, sneak 
and swimming cannot be used while wearing this armor. 
Tangler Gun: 4D stun damage, uses missile weapons skill, 
ranges 5-10/30/60, mounted on right arm. 
Duo-Flechette Rifle: 5D damage, uses armor weapons skill, 
ranges 3-10/30/60, mounted on right forearm armor. 
Retractable Blade: STR+2D damage, concealed in right gaunt- 
let. 


Sensors: A sensor pod and targeting computer provides 
+1D to search, and +1D to weapons skill rolls. 


Shosk’irid/39:3:9:48/Isse The Rodians excel at 
crafting surprisingly good armor. Stalker armor 
has a nice mix of weapons, solid protection and 
durable construction. Its sensors add a unique 
advantage to the wearer leaving an opponent 
nowhere to run and difficulty in dodging blows. All 
in all, some fairly decent solid armor at a fair price. 


Yohar/39:4:4:05/Cale Actually the “humanoid” 
configuration isn’t worth the extra cost the manu- 
facturer tacks on—Rodians aren't much smaller 
or larger than standard humans and most near- 
humans. 


Bodu/39:4:9:21/Ithe | don’t know if I agree with 
that; anybody who purchases a Stalker should 
consider getting it as well-tailored as possible. 
Any shifting of the armor plating may throw some 
of the weapons out of alignment. (Imagine your 
tangler gun snaring you instead of your target. Not 
pretty.) 


Sunder 9 Prototype Armor 


Dr. Llalik worked on the Sunder 9 design for 
nearly a full year before he was contracted by the 
Empire to design the Zero-G spacetrooper armor, 
forcing him to put aside his personal project. The 
two Sunder 9 prototype suits are still incomplete 
and are stored at his home on Plavin 6, where they 
are guarded by his personal security detachment 
(led by one particularly vicious security droid). 
For now the untested armor remains idle in his 
securi-vault. 


Sunder 9 Prototype Armor 
Model: Lialik Designs Sunder 9 Armor Prototype (Incom- 
plete) 
Type: Multi-environment personal battlesuit 
Skill: Powersuit operation: Sunder 9 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: 
Armor: Provides a +3D to Strength for physical attacks, +2D 
for energy attacks, -1D+2 to Dexterity and related skills. Full 
cover. 
Strength: Servos in the upper portion of the armor add 
+1D+2 to Strength for lifting, brawling and melee damage. 
Blaster Cannon: Cannon on left arm (usually right, but Dr. 
Lialik is left-handed). 6D damage, uses blaster skill, ranges 
10-50/100/500. 
Flame Projector: 5D damage, uses armor weapons skill, 
projects up to three meters. Right arm. 
Rocket Pack: Has a Move of 90 meters horizontally, 50 
meters vertically. Uses rocket pack operation skill, base 
difficulty is Easy, modified by terrain conditions. Has 12 
charges, can expend up to three per round. 
Sensors: Provides 270-degree vision and macrobinocular 
vision. Gives wearer +1D to Perception rolls, +2D to search. 
Includes specialized sonar and infrared sensor packages 
for dark environment or aquatic depths where light is not 
available. 
Aquatic Propulsion System: Increases swimming skill by +2D; 
gives wearer an underwater Move of 14. 
Body Glove: Aclimate-controlled body glove provides heat- 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrove 


ing and cooling systems to allow operation in extreme 

environments, 

Sealed Enviro-Filter: System prevents entry of foreign sub- 

stances, can also be sealed completely when in hostile 

environments or during submersion. Has four hours of 

power and six hours of oxygen. 
“Credman”/39:8:4:90/Csce The Sunder 9 was 
probably one of the most sophisticated pieces of 
equipment I've ever seen. Throughout my career, 
I've worn many different types of armor, but I 
would definitely love to own just one of these. I’m 
not the only one either, | know of several smug- 
glers and thieves who have made Plavin 6 their 
temporary home, searching for Dr. Llalik. So far, 
no one has seen anything out of the ordinary. 


Ubese Raider Armor 


Designed to maintain a Type II atmosphere for 
Ubese traveling away from their homeworld, these 
suits are all custom-tailored to individual specifi- 
cations. The armor is ideally suited for modifica- 
tion and is constructed with such upgrades in 
mind. 


Ubese Raider Armor 
Model: Stock Ubese Raider Armor 
Type: Battle armor 
Cost: 1000 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: 
Basic Suit: Provides +2D to Strength for physical attacks, 
+1D for energy attacks. Covers torso and head only. No 
Dexterity penalties. 


aise er = * =. 


™ 
= 
- 
- 
- 


Sealed Enviro Filter: Filter system maintains Type II atmo- 
sphere within helmet, and filters out harmful molecules 
and odors. 

Flash Guard Visor: Nullifies all stun damage from visual 
sources (for instance, flash canisters or grenades), 


illustration by Chris Trevas 


Pyjam/42:9:3:24/Crle Ubese armor’s main advan- 
tage—aside from the technological edge it pro- 
vides—is the design's fearsome appearance. Noth- 
ing scares a target so much as the sight of Raider 
armor. | modified my existing 611 powersuit 
heavily, including some extremely Ubese-like de- 
sign elements. 


Leso/42:9:5:98/Tra® The enviro filter is virtually 
impossible to replace if you want to modify Ubese 
armor to accept a Type l atmosphere. The enviro- 
filter is of nonstandard shape and size and modi- 
fying a Type | enviro-filter to mate with the armor 
reduces the reliability of the seal. 


Vagabond Suit 


The vagabond got its name from its long-range 
exploration capability. More than just a simple 
space suit, however, the vagabond incorporates 
the sensor capabilities of a full standard scanning 
unit with directional arrays mounted on the shoul- 
ders and chest, so the scout may perform manual 
tasks without hindrance. 

These scanners can be set to record data on the 
suit’s small on-board computer system, relayed 
directly to a nearby ship by the helmet’s comm 
transfer programs, or given to the scout in a 


continuous heads-up feature on the helmet visor. 
The scanners themselves are quite versatile, and 
can be configured to probe nearby radiation lev- 
els or conduct a complete mineral analysis. The 
suit also provides information vital to the scout, 
such as a full bio-scan readout and constant navi- 
gational fixes to keep the scout aware of his loca- 
tion at any given time. 


Vagabond Suit 
Model: Customized vagabond space suit 
Type: Deep space powersuit 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Powersuit operation 
Cost: 2,500 credits 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: Add +2D to sensors and communications rolls 
while suit is used independent of a base ship. Add +1D if 
linked to base ship. The suit's armor provides +2D against 
physical attacks. Booster jets provide a top speed equiva- 
lent to Space | with a maneuverability of 1D. The on-board 
sensor array has the following specifications. 
Passive: 3/0D 
Scan: 6/0D 
Search: 9/1D 
Focus: 1/2D 


Lowwel/40:3:4:89/Cad* Vagabond armor is usu- 
ally sold at a fairly good price and, in my opinion, 
there should be at least one on each ship. This is 
a good space suit to have if you’re scavenging a 
wreck and need to record what's in it before you 
send in a full crew. The navigational fixes help 
keep the wearer from getting lost...which is a 
common occurrence if you are attempting to sal- 
vage ships from battlezones left over from the 
Alliance-Empire conflict. 


Wrokix Works Armored Spacesuit 


Armored spacesuits are necessary for any ac- 
tions that might involve combat beyond the con- 
fines of a starship interior. Spacetrooper armor is 
an extremely sophisticated example of this con- 
cept; most armored spacesuits are much simpler 
designs. Most have self-healing patch systems in 
the event of a puncture, multiple respiration sys- 
tems, comlinks and armor plating. 


Wrokix Works Armored Spacesuit 

Model: Wrokix Works Deluxe Boarding Armor 

Type: Armored spacesuit 

Seale: Character 

Cost: 8,500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Body: space helmet and body armor +1D from 

all energy attacks, +2D from all physical attacks, -1D from 

Dexterity attribute and skills. Has life support for five hours 

and internal gyro stabilizers adding +1D to Dexterity for 

zero gravity situations. 
Kris/45:4:1:06/Erie Be careful with the internal 
gyros; they get knocked out of alignment fairly 
easily; you can override the safety mechanisms to 
compensate, but that takes time. If you are ina bad 
fight outside your ship, be ready for the Wrokix to 
lose its stabilizers after a couple of hits. 


Armor Attachments 


Antipersonnel Net Gun 


This gun, often mounted on forearm armor, 
fires a single net that can snare a human-sized 
opponent. A single line keeps the net attached to 
the gun after firing. If the net successfully en- 
snares an opponent, the attacker can on following 
rounds release an electrical charge through the 
line, into the net and at the target causing the 
victim much pain. The net gun is a popular option 
for bounty hunters modifying their armor, although 
the electrical charge sometimes severely dam- 
ages or kills captured prey. 


Antipersonnel Net Gun 
Model: Conner APNG3 
Type: Restraining net gun 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Ammo: | 
Cost: 750 (replacement net costs 100 credits) 
Availability: 2, R or X 
Range: 3-10/19/25 
Damage: 5D stun, 5D electrical 
Game Notes: An opponent can work free of the net by 
making an opposed Strength roll greater than the stun 
damage of the net. 


War’ qi/39:2:1:36/Kote | had some of the best 
bounty hunter armor money could buy. Both arms 
were just covered with toys that did everything 
but eat and talk. My personal favorite was my net 
gun: just point and shoot and you've got your man. 
What! really like about it was that if the target was 
acting up after the capture, you just let him zap 


him with the unit's electric shock delivery system 
and he’d quiet down real fast. Sure, there was 
always a chance you'd fry the grubber, but a lot of 
contracts only insist the mark be alive; not happy. 


Electric Field 


The “Big Shock” is a webbed lacing applied to 
armor surfaces to generate an electrical field that 
does damage to those touching the wearer. Elec- 
trical damage can be delivered if the wearer 
touches an opponent (tackling or punching him 
and doing the electrical damage along with brawl- 
ing damage), or if an opponent strikes the wearer 
in hand-to-hand or melee combat. The shock is 
enough to short out the power circuits in most 
vibro-weapons. 

Asmaller version of this weapon, known as the 
shock glove, consists of an armored gauntlet in- 
corporating a power supply. The shock glove 
does only 1D electrical damage and costs 500 
credits. 

Electrical shock lacing must be used on pow- 
ered armor suits, as normal battle armor cannot 
fulfill this weapon’s power requirements unless 
fitted with unwieldy generators or power cells. 

Since the shock lacing coats the outer surfaces 
of the armor, it rarely harms the wearer. However, 
if used in wet conditions, the shock lacing inflicts 
its damage on the wearer as well as the opponent. 
In any case, shock lacing applied to close to other 
powered armor systems like weapons and sen- 
sors often short circuits those systems, especially 
in wet conditions. 


Electric Field 

Model: Corellian Personal Defense “Big Shock” 

Type: Electric shock lacing 

Cost: 1,600 

Availability: 3, X 

Damage: 3D 
Staven/42:2:5:57/Bale This is one of those ideas 
that looked really good in theory. However, it 
backfires on the user often enough that I wouldn't 
recommend it unless you live ona very dry planet. 
The other problem it has is it reacts badly to other 
weapons on bounty hunter armor. I think its best 
use is for what it was originally intended for—self- 
defense for people who can't defend themselves. 


Alydyr/42:4:8:21/Date Actually, while an electric 
field isn’t a great armor attachment, it works in 
other areas quite well. I doctored up the defense 
module on my landspeeder with the electric-field 
gear and it gave a would-be thief a rude awakening. 


Mini-Missile Launcher 
This launcher fires missiles with incendiary 
warheads. The missiles have no guidance system 
and must be aimed directly at a target. SoroSuub’s 
Fireball missile package is a similar version of the 


die) 


». 


> 
< 


Mf xaa 
T S 


Firestorm-1, but the mini-missiles have small guid- 
ance packages which lock onto targets acquired 
through a target sensor package in an armored 
suit’s helmet. Additional mini-missiles cost 100 
credits each, 


Mini-Missile Launcher 
Model: SoroSuub Firestorm-1 
Type: Personal missile launcher 
Skill: Missile weapons 
0: 3 


Cost: 1,500 

Availability: 3, R or X 

Range: 3~40/120/400 

Blast Radius: ()-2/8/12/20 

Damage: 5D/4D/3D/2D 
War’qi/40:8:3:56/Sele In a way, | actually pre- 
ferred the Firestorm to the Fireball. Sure it doesn’t 
have a guidance package, but that makes it more 
of a challenge. | mean, the whole idea of being a 
bounty hunter is to hunt your target down. I don't 
think using a guidance system is actually fair. Of 
course, if you're just in it for the money, than the 
Fireball would be your weapon. 


Lloco/40:9:1:91/Sule Anybody with a price on his 
head didn’t get it by playing by the rules, pal. A 
guided weapon—and the Fireball is asuperb guided 
weapon—can clean out anybody lying in ambush 
quicker than hyperdrive and allow you to walk in 
and out with your target. Giving your mark a 
chance to fight back is asking for trouble. 


Mini-Torpedo Launcher 


This weapon fires a self-propelled underwater 
torpedo with an explosive charge that detonates 
on impact. The torpedo must be aimed at a spe- 
cific target and will not adjust its course if the 
target moves. However, the torpedo’s firing and 
guidance systems can be rigged to a sensor track- 
ing package to acquire and follow a particular 
target with the proper tools and guidance system 
components. 

Due to its size, this weapon can only be fitted to 
heavy power armor adapted for use in aquatic 
environments. Additional torpedoes cost 100 cred- 
its each. 


Mini-Torpedo Launcher 

Model: Mon Cal Defenses Mini-Torpedo Launcher 

Type: Mini-torpedo launcher 

Skill: Missile weapons 

Ammo: 3 

Cost: 1,250 

Availability: 3, X 

Range: 3-30/120/350 

Damage: 6D 
Ellylyn/40:2:9:10/Nare This is one of those bounty 
hunter toys which has limited use on most plan- 
ets. Of course, on planets where the terrain is 
mostly water, this weapon is the best thing to have 
on you. I should know, I once had a pretty large 
bounty on my head and had to disappear for a 


while. | set up a small underwater dwelling on Mon 
Calamari with some of my last credits. | stayed 
there for a while, but Rogis, a small-time bounty 
hunter with lots of money to back him, found me 
out. Almost wiped me out too; I didn't expect him 
to have one of those torpedo-launchers. Luckily, | 
got to my aqua-skimmer and left just before he 
blew up my safehouse. Good piece of weaponry, if 
you're on the giving end (but bloody intimidating 
if you're the target). 


Motion Sensor Array 


Typically added to a standard blast helmet, an 
external sensor array detects motion within the 
wearer's visual radius and transmits audial sig- 
nals corresponding to speed and direction de- 
tected. Though range is limited, this early warning 
system can prepare a hunter against an otherwise 
unseen attack. 


Motion Sensor Array 
Model: Neuro-Saavy MacroMotionMonitor 
Type: Personal motion detector 
Cost: 40 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: Adds +1D to search rolls involving motion up 
to 50 meters away. 


Regall/39:2:9:41/Rod* | equipped a small 
hovercam with a motion tracker. It slows the ‘cam 
down, but not only does it record data and shoot 
it back to me, but it gives me advanced warning on 
an attacker's position. The only problem is that 
the hovercam has a real tough time staying away 
from the moving target, since they’re attracted to 
activity. Still, this configuration can give me an 
edge in a tight spot (even if | do have to buy 
hovercams pretty frequently). 


Wrist Lasers 


These compact laser weapons are capable of 
inflicting serious damage at extremely close range. 
They are ideal for those tight spots when a con- 
ventional weapon is out of reach (when grappling 


with an opponent, for example). These recharge- 
able, solar-powered gauntlets are a mark of dis- 
tinction for every professional hunter. In extreme 
situations, a forced chamber overload can be 
used to blow away the opposition. 

The Koromondia RLW-77 comes in two models: 
one for use as an armor attachment, and one 
designed for use by unarmored individuals. Typi- 
cally the armor attachment is available through 
law-enforcement equipment dealers, while the 
“personal weapon” configuration is marketed to 
wealthy individuals who fear abduction. 


Wrist Lasers 
Model: Koromondain PDS, Inc. Model RLW-77 
Type: Wrist laser gauntlets 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: wrist lasers 
Ammo: 15 
Cost: 2,000 (for armor-attachment design), 1,200 (for per- 
sonal weapon design), 100 (power packs) 
Availability: 2, F 
Range: 0-2 (Moderate difficulty or opponent's melee parry 
or brawling parry roll) 
Damage: 4D 
Game Notes: Overload setting is non-reversible, takes 15 
seconds to power up and results in 8D/5D/3D damage with 
blast radius of 1-2/4/6. 


Darry/42:8:2:58/Umge They've been touted as 
one of the most important pieces of equipment for 
the bounty hunter. I have to admit wrist lasers can 
be very useful in tight situations. However, | think 
that bounty hunters have less use for them than 
those in other trades. Very rarely as a bounty 
hunter did I ever get into a situation where I was 
grappling with someone. | feel that if | was that 
close and still fighting, | did something wrong 
earlier in the game. When I was not in my hunter's 
outfit, there was a higher risk of a brawl. Oh, I did 
get the wrist lasers, but not for the hunt. 


Heldar/42:9:0:12/Pro* | recommend to many of 
my clients—typically wealthy nobles in the 
Procopia region—wear wrist lasers during peri- 
ods where they travel. Most pat-down searches 
don't detect modern wrist lasers and this gives my 
clients a slight edge during an attempted abduc- 
tion. 


TH 


= 


~ =* 
: 
= —— 
a 2 


7 
à 
ys eT 


ži 


Combat Paraglider xs FS 
HHS Thruster Pack 67 
Zim Systems Rocket Pack 68 


Combat Paraglider 


Combat paragliders were originally developed 
for use by Rebel SpecForces. These unusual con- 
veyances have been substantially modified from 
their civilian form in a number of ways. Sensor- 
baffling reflec body panels absorb many low-pow- 
ered sensors, giving off only a slight return (in 
effect making the paraglider appear to be substan- 
tially smaller than it actually is). Careless sensor 
operators often mistake a combat paraglider for 
birds or other such innocuous avian creature. 

In addition, combat paragliders have a number 
of mounting brackets for equipment storage, even 
of modestly heavy items. The repulsorlift package 
has also been augmented to help lift heavier equip- 
ment and improve the vehicle's stability and han- 
dling. In general, the paraglider can carry up to 80 
kilograms of equipment in addition to the pilot. 

The combat paraglider also possesses a pull- 
down display visor that is deployed directly in 
front of the pilot's face. This display gives easy 
access to night vision, terrain following and direc- 
tional modules. 

Finally, each paraglider is equipped with a low- 
powered transponder that allows the pilot to lo- 
cate other similarly-equipped paragliders in the 
immediate vicinity (for operations in darkness or 
other low-visibility conditions). 


Illustration by Starn A. Cook 


Conveyances 


Combat Paragliders 
Model: Modified Nen-Carvon R-19 Paraglider 
Type: Combat paraglider 
Scale: Character 
Length: 4.5 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation 
Crew: | 
Altitude Range: Ground level-5,000 meters 
Cost: 1,900 credits (black market only) 
Availability: 2, X 
Maneuverability: 3D 
Move: 90; 260 kmh 
Body Strength: 2D 
Game Notes: Reflec body panels increase sensor checks to 
detect the glider by one difficulty level. Heads-up display 
has night-vision mode (allows sight with no penalty in a 45- 
degree arc in front of the pilot, up to a range of 50 meters), 
terrain-following mode (+1D to sensors checks to follow 
terrain), and a directional mode (which shows the glider's 
current position). A low-level transponder allows the pilot 
to identify other paragliders using the same frequency 
(allowing the pilot to remain in visual contact with other 
team members). 


Gunman/40:4:0:09/Elre The combat paraglider 
is an ideal device for inserting a team behind 
enemy lines covertly; it lets you stay in touch with 
your teammates and keeps you reasonably pro- 
tected from detection. 


Holla/40:8:2:31/Deb* While the combat paraglider 
is definitely good for covert missions, you are as 
good as vaped if your opponents figure out you're 
there: the combat ‘glider offers virtually no pro- 
tection against incoming fire. 


HHS Thruster Pack 


An enhanced version of a standard rocket pack, 
this thruster pack utilizes miniaturized repulsor- 
lift stabilizers and special liquid fuel mixtures to 
provide longer flight times than other rocket packs. 
The pack has an optional hover mode. 


li 


TEZA 


baiia 


{ 


KANUS 


OT 
” 


HHS Thruster Pack 
Model: Greshnohr DRPV-78 Rocket Pack 
Type: Rocket pack 
Skill: Rocket pack operation 
Cost: 600 
Availability: 2, R 
Game Notes: Each operation burst permits horizontal flight 
up to 500 meters and vertical lift up to 300 meters. Has fuel 
for 12 bursts, but the pack must be cool for one round after 
each burst. The repulsorlift generator allows the pack to 
hover and has a Move of 15 (cannot be used in conjunction 
with the rocket blast). The repulsor unit can operate con- 
tinuously for a maximum of 10 minutes; it must cool for 
twice as long as it was operating. 


Wustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Staven/38:2:9:85/Kote It took several years of 
searching before I found the rocket pack for me. 
The Greshnohr DRPV-78 is a powerful conveyance 
and has a great flight time. It took a while to get 
used to the aim and balance, but once | had 
control the pack was invaluable. Several times it 
got me out of a really tricky situation. No one 
seems to identify the repulsorlift generator, which 
allows me to hover out of sight above them—the 
last place they'd look. 


Zim Systems Rocket Pack 


Rocket packs are a rather exhilarating form of 
personal conveyance. Generally, rocket packs are 
bulky, heavy modules that the user straps to her 
back. These packs contain combustible chemical 
fuel that provides thrust. Because of this, rocket 
packs do not require outside air to generate thrust, 
allowing the devices to operate in space as well as 
inside an atmosphere. The main danger in using a 
rocket pack in combat is the chemical fuel cell; a 
stray shot can cause a rocket pack to explode. 


Zim Systems Rocket Pack 

Model: Zim Systems ROCKET 

Type: Personal rocket pack 

Skill: Rocket pack operation 

Cost: 750 

Availability; 2, 3 

Game Notes: The ROCKET can carry 80 kilograms up to 40 

meters vertically and 120 meters horizontally on a single 

charge. The pack has 10 charges. 
Dr. Itlar/40:8:5:67/Chae The ROCKET was the 
favored conveyance of the Old Republic Rocket- 
jumper Elite Advance Unit, a feared corps of com- 
mandos famed for their extravagant behavior and 
battlefield bravery. Rocket-jumpers typically 
treated their packs like swoopers treat their ve- 
hicles; ROCKETs that saw military service were 
often heavily modified to increase performance. 
Despite the dated construction, the majority of 
Zim Systems’ units still function (though the fuel 
delivery system will have to be modified to accept 
modern propellants). 


Biodegradable Binders 

Force Cage 

Magnacuffs 

Magnaharness 

Man Trap 

Restraint Capsule 

Slave Collars (and Director Unit) 
Slaver Snare Gun 

Stohkli Spray Sticks 

Stun Cuffs 


Tangler Gun 


70 
70 
70 
74 
74 
74 
72 
72 
73 
73 
73 


Biodegradable Binders 


Made from special high-strength polymers, 
these binders differ from standard models in their 
locking mechanism. Instead of a traditional lock, 
they have a one-way clasp that seals once linked. 
Once activated, the binders deteriorate in 36 hours. 
An application of a special harmless molecular 
solvent will degrade the binders sooner if neces- 


sary. 


Biodegradable Binders 

Model: TaggeCo. Biodegradable Binders 

Type: Temporary binders 

Cost: 75 

Availability: 2, R 

Game Notes: Once applied, a character must make an 

opposed Strength roll to break free (the binders have a 

Strength of 6D). 
Ellylyn/41:6:4:98/Alze These TaggeCo. biodegrad- 
able binders are worth their cost. The only time 
they are inconvenient is if you want someone in 
them for longer than 36 hours. Then you should 
use a more standard restraint device. But these 
binders are pretty strong and you don't have to 
worry about an escape artist picking the lock. 36 
hours should be enough time to get a prisoner into 
the hold of your ship. 


Force Cage 


A portable adaptation of standard force field 
lockups employed by Imperial law-enforcement 
agencies. Using a collapsible exoskeleton frame of 
synthetic ceramics, a force cage is a construct two 
meters long by four meters wide by two meters 
tall; collapsible bi-state memory plastic plates 
form the floor of the cage. The cage can be as- 
sembled in about five minutes. Any acquisition 
placed in the cage is suitably confined—they may 
sit or stand on the floor, but anyone attempting to 
reach outside the cage is shocked. Also, anyone 
trying to cut through the floor of the cage is 
shocked by a layer of shock circuits within the 
floor plates. The force cage projects its force field 
between the frame bars and along the inside of the 
cage is shocked it they try to reach between the 
frame bars or touch the frame rails. The outside 
frame rails are insulated, so people may push the 
cage by pushing on the rails. 


Restraint Devices 


Force Cage 

Model: Damorind Securities Model S-3 

Type: Humanoid portable containment system 

Skill: Security (to assemble) 

Cost: 7,000 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: An easy security roll is necessary to properly 

assemble the device; if not assembled properly, the shock 

system does not work. The shock system may be set for 

variable damage (1D-7D, stun or normal damage). Anyone 

confined within the cage must make an opposed roll against 

the cage’s Strength of 7D to break out. 
War’qi/42:3:1:47/Reue | wasn’t going to bother 
with anything like this; | figured | wouldn't need 
one. | just bound the bounty up good and tight and 
threw him in the cargo hold. Well, I found out that 
doesn't always work. For one thing, more than 
once | had to defend myself in my own ship when 
attacked by what I thought was a acquiescent 
mark. I also found out that many employers want 
the bounties returned healthy and well-cared for. 
More than once, an employer used the excuse of 
“poor treatment” to give me less than the maxi- 
mum bounty. Well, I got one of these force cages 
and set it up in my cargo hold. I've never had a 
problem since. 


Shollo/42:4:4:12/Llie Just make sure you leave 
the prisoner empty-handed. I gave a captive a 
datapad with some fiction on it to keep him occu- 
pied and quiet during his flight “home.” Instead, 
he uses the circuitry in the ‘pad to bypass the 
shockers in the cage floor for a few seconds—long 
enough to cut his way free with the dinner utensils 
l left him. Trang ‘em and leave ‘em with nothing, 
that’s my motto. 


Magnacuffs 


Magnacuffs employ micro-magnetic fields to 
lock their restraining bands in place. The use of a 
fingerprint identification system eliminates the 
need for keys and guards against unauthorized 
duplication. 


Magnacuffs 
Model: Loris Syndicated Securities MCI-100 
Type: Personal restraint device 


Game Notes: Magnacuffs have a Strength of 6D+2 to hold 
individuals. 
Gant/40:2:0:31/Mnte | heard a rumor that if you 
can work a non-ferrous material between the 
magnacuff locking pincers, you can break the 
connection and get out of the cuffs. 


Lloco/40:2:7:44/Pare Not likely, pal. The strength 
of the magnetic seal on the cuffs is pretty intense. 
Anything small enough to avoid detection by the 
guys locking you up is probably too small to 
interfere with the seal. If somebody locks you up 
with magnacuffs, count on a long incarceration. 


Magnaharness 


A full-sized application of magnacuff technology, 
used to more fully restrain a target. Rather than 
simply confining atarget’s hands, the magnaharness 
attaches at the next and torso, with optional clips 
for arms, legs, upper and lower legs and feet. This 
greatly restricts movement and allows hunters to 
relax guard dutv around prisoners. 


lliustration by 
Jerry DeCrotie 


Magnacuffs (top left), biodegradable binders (top right), 
stun cuffs (center) and force cages (bottom) are common 
restraint devices. 


Magnaharness 
Model: Loris Syndicated Securities MCI-200 
Type: Personal full-sized restraint device 
Cost: 200 
Availability: 2, F 
Game Notes: Magnaharnesses have a Strength of 8D to hold 
individuals. 


Lloco/40:3:2:09/Pare Be sure you don’t let your 
guard relax too much. A friend of mine had a 
prisoner escape because he wasn't keeping a close 


eye on the grubber; he figured the magnaharness 
would hold him, so why waste the effort? Appar- 
ently his prisoner had a small comlink hidden on 
him, and he summoned help—all because my pal 
got lazy. 


Man Trap 


The man trap is a miniaturized reversed repul- 
sorlift field. A small flat one-meter-square piece of 
metal is normally hidden; it is powered by a small 
repulsorlift generator, with a cord 10 meters long 
(additional length cords can be purchased). The 
man trap also has a remote activator. Once acti- 
vated, the man trap creates a high intensity grav- 
ity field (repulsorlift repels against local gravity; 
this revered field greatly intensifies the gravity). 
The resulting gravity field is so strong that atarget 
stepping on or over the field is pulled to the plate, 
immobilized. Movement, let alone escape, is virtu- 
ally impossible. Once the intended target is so 
immobilized, the acquisition can be quickly tran- 
quilized and secured. 


Man Trap 
Model: Ubrikkian R-TechApp Man Trap 
Type: Localized gravity enhancer 
Cost: 8,000 
Availability: 3, F 
Game Notes: The person setting the man trap should make 
a hide roll to see how well the device is hidden; any 
potential target making a successful Perception roll will 
notice the trap. Anyone caught by the trap must make an 
opposed Strength roll—the man trap’s gravity setting is 
variable, simulated by allowing the hunter to choose a 
Strength anywhere between 5D and 15D. 


Gunman /44:2:4:09/Elre The practical applications 
of this device are enormous. Not only is it an 
effective restraint and capture device, but I’ve 
seen it work as a military defensive measure as 
well. We were dug in, holding off an attack by some 
Imperial Army grunts on Gosho IV, and we set up 
a defensive perimeter of these things (we had 
dozens after a raid on an Imperial weapons dump). 
The Imps began tossing grenades...which were 
promptly slammed to the ground by the traps, 
detonating prematurely. It gave us a few spare 
seconds to rally and push them back. 


Restraint Capsule 


An upgraded, shipboard version of a portable 
force cage, RPC-12 restraint capsules use multiple 
layers of low-level force fields with power regula- 
tors for an effective restraint system, but with 
minimal power requirements, reducing the drain 
on a ship's power systems. 


Restraint Capsule 
Model: Damorind Securities RPC-12 
Type: Shipboard containment system 
Skill: Security 
Cost: 10,700 
Availability: 3, F 
Game Notes: The shock system may be set for variable 
damage (1D-7D, stun or normal damage). Anyone confined 


within the cage must make an opposed roll against the 

cage's Strength of 7D to break out. 
Faloww/39:5:7:23/Gare It is possible to short out 
enough of the power regulators to make the shock 
system fail. By constantly slamming objects—a 
dinner tray, a boot, and so on—into the force 
fields increases the power demand tothe capsule’s 
systems. Eventually, it has to draw more than the 
regulators can take and bang! Down comes the 
force fields. 


Slave Collars (and Director Unit) 


Director units and slave collars enable a small 
number of slavers to maintain control over a large 
number of prisoners, The slave collar is a metal 
circlet (adjustable for size) which fits around the 
neck, arm or other extremity. The “necklace” con- 
tains micro-circuitry and couplings for power 
cables (to link multiple units). The director unit 
broadcasts commands and directs high-voltage 
electricity shocks to the victims, causing great 
pain. Some units also feature a kill feature in case 
of escape attempts. These devices—once en- 
dorsed by the Empire for “licensed slavers"—are 
now seen only rarely, and only among illegal slav- 
ing operations. 


Illustration by 
Jerry DeCrotie 


Slave Collars (and Director Unit) 

Model: Custom-made Slave Collars with Director Unit 

Type: Slave collars 

Scale: Character 

Cost: 10,000 (for one director unit and 10 slave collars) 

Availability: 3, R, X 

Damage: 2D-5D physical damage depending on setting, 

“kill” setting: 8D damage. 
Gunman/43:4:9:65/Elre | spent some time on a 
“necklace” after Imperial slavers (who were seiz- 
ing Wookiees near Yitabo) captured me. My unit 
had been stalking the slavers, looking for a good 
way to take ‘em down and free the Wookiees; | 
strayed too close on a recon run and was cap- 
tured. There is no way to describe the agony a 
slave collar can inflict. What the Wookiees did to 
the slavers, on the other hand, must have made 
the collar seem like a pleasant holiday. 


Slaver Snare Gun 


A favorite of slaver strike teams throughout the 
galaxy, the snare gun isa passive restraint weapon 
capable of rendering a targeted victim immobile 
in a matter of seconds. This shoulder-mounted, 
tube-launched device emits a cone of chemically 
treated wire filaments. On striking an object, these 
filaments coil themselves tightly around the in- 
tended target. Once exposed to the open atmo- 
sphere, these filaments immediately begin to ex- 
pand and contract. The result is a rapid constric- 
tion of movement. In a matter of seconds, the 
filaments fuse into a hard shell, effectively inca- 
pacitating the victim within. 


Slaver Snare Gun 


Model: Thalassian Corodex Snare 

Type: Ranged personal restraint weapon 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Missile weapons; Thalassian snare gun 

Ammo: 6 

Cost: 1,200 (black market) 

Availability: 3, F or X 

Range: 5-10/25/50 

Damage: 2D stun damage 

Game Notes: Upon initial contact, the targeted individual 
must make an opposed Strength roll to avoid entanglement; 
the snare has a beginning Strength of 3D. Failure to do so 
results in entanglement, The snare's Strength increases by 
+1D for each additional round as the filaments continue to 
constrict and harden. The filaments cause no physical 
damage. A special formulated dissolving agent degrades 
the filaments. 


illustration by Mike Vilardi 


Trenton/41:5:3:30/Kuae | once was in a situation 
where someone used a snare gun on me. It was like 
being attacked bya barrel of Ossiathoran noodles. 
l started to move to escape the mess when it 
wrapped around me, closing in tighter and tighter. 
Soon enough, I was on the ground, not even able to 
twitch I was wrapped so tight. I never want to see 
one of those snare guns again. 


Yiggothal/41:6:1:83/Edre A snare gun is perfect 
for taking out an unsuspecting target. But if you 
are facing a well-prepared opponent, it isn’t much 
of an advantage. I saw a Rebel agent slice his hand 
free from a snare with a vibroknife and vape the 
slaver in the space of a heartbeat; apparently the 
Rebel—some guy named Shelvay—was familiar 
with this particular slaver and prepared himself 
for the confrontation. Got the grubber dead-bang, 
too. 


Stokhli Spray Sticks 


Stokhli spray sticks are effective long-range 
stun weapons developed by the Stokhli people of 
the planet Manress. The weapons work by shoot- 
ing aspraynet mist up to two hundred meters. The 
spraynets are charged with enough shockstun 
juice to take down a good-sized gundark (no of- 
fense) or other large game animal. The sticks 
come equipped with a thumb trigger and spray 
nozzle. The controls are simple, providing the 
spray profile, pressure levels and triggering pin. 

When fired, a fine spray mist shoots from the 
nozzle. The mist appears as semisolid tendrils of 
thin, translucent material. When exposed to air, 
the spray hardens around its target. The spraynet 
delivers a huge stun and wraps the target in 
confining tendrils, completely immobilizing the 
creature or person. 

Used mostly by big-game hunters on more primi- 
tive planets, stokhli spray sticks can be effective 
capture weapons. 


Stokhli Spray Sticks 
Model: Stokhli Spray Stick 
Type: Non-lethal restraint 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster: Stokhli spray stick 
Ammo: 10 charges (1 charge can generate up to 500 meters 
of spraynet) 
Cost: 14,000 
Availability: R 
Range: 50/100/200 
Damage: 6D stun damage. Entangled characters must make 
opposed Strength roll to break free (6D Strength). 


Dresdin/39:2:2:21/Bime This is probably one of 
the most effective non-lethal weapons out on the 
black market, but it is simply not worth the price 
unless you are chasing a high bounty. You usually 
see it in the hands of animal smugglers, who have 
to take their acquisitions to private collectors 
who want their prizes undamaged. 


Stun Cuffs 


Stun cuffs are standard wrist binders which are 
powered to send paralyzing jolts of electricity 
directly into the nervous system of the bound 
prisoner, proportional in strength to the amount 
of struggle the prisoner exerts. They are in com- 
mon use in many prison facilities, as well as police 
organizations around the galaxy. 


Stun Cuffs 

Model: BlasTech AR-101 Stun Cuffs 

Type: Stun binders 

Cost: 100 

Availability: 2, F 

Game Notes: The stun cuffs are passive if the cuffed char- 

acter does not struggle. If the character does struggle, the 

cuffs do stun damage equal to the character's Strength. 
Rinfro/39:5:1:17/Umge Stun cuffs are the bane of 
lawbreakers everywhere. | was locked into a pair 
of these blasted things once and the pain was 
excruciating. 


Tyo/39:7:3:21/Elre | always wear small bracers of 
nonconductive material. By using a thin mate- 
rial—synthskin lined with duraplas, for example— 
stun cuffs can’t administer a shock. It may not 
keep you out of the cuffs, but it will allow you to 
remain conscious. 


Tangler Gun 


The tangler gun fires a triple strand of durawire 
weighted at each of the three ends. The spinning 
wires ensnare opponents, preventing them from 
fleeing or attacking. This weapon is available as a 
short, wide-barreled sidearm with a folding stock 
and retractable sight for those who want to use 
the tangler without having to mount it on armor. 

An extra clip of five tangler packages costs 25 
credits. 


Tangler Gun 
Model: Salus Tangler Elite 1 Tangler Gun 
Type: Tangler gun 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Ammo: 5 
Cost: 900 credits; 25 credits per extra clip for tangler 
package 
Availability: 3 
Range: 5-10/30/60 
Damage: 2D (caused by the impact of the weighted ends of 
the durawire), 4D stun damage (caused by durawire tangler 
package) 
Game Notes: An opponent can work free of the tangler by 
making an opposed Strength roll greater than the stun 
damage of the tangler. 


War’qi/43:1:9:45/Atze | don't like the Tangler as 
much as | like other restraint weapons simply 
because too many things can go wrong. The lines 
can tangle, the mark can throw something in its 
path (or just get out of the net before you can get 
to him). It is a nice concept and has its merits, but 
works best if you have the element of surprise. 


Universal Energy Cage 


During the Great Purge of the Jedi Knights, 
transporting the Jedi to the Imperial dungeons 
was a dangerous, nearly impossible feat. To fix 
this situation, aJunior Engineer named Umak Leth 
created the Universal Energy Cage. The cage is a 
floating confinement sphere, three meters in di- 
ameter, filled with elaborate coils of supercon- 
ductors overlapping in a complex pattern. Once 
energized, the whole sphere is wrapped in a force 
field, similar to the ones used to contain ionized 
plasmas in reactors; the force field seals the cage’s 
occupant inside. 

The unit moves by use of arepulsorlift unit and 
it suspends the prisoner within the cage with a 
secondary repulsorlift unit. The more a prisoner 
attempts to break out, the more feedback he 
receives. The sphere is entirely self-contained 
and floats through the air so no one can sabotage 
it. The only way to unlock the cage is through a 
specially coded radio signal held only be the 
Sovereign Protectors. 

Itis currently unknown what the specific limita- 
tions of the energy cage are, how stronga prisoner 
it can hold, how long can it hold him or if any sort 
of energy dampener could break through 


Universal Energy Cage 
Model: Imperial Universal Energy Cage 
Type: Enclosed prisoner transfer system 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 100,000 credits 
Availability: X (restricted to legal governments) 
Move: 15; 45 kmh 
Game Notes: Energy cage encloses prisoner in a force field 
with a Strength of up to 15D (unit only applies as much 
energy as necessary to restrain prisoner, so the energy 


x, 
RA 
ge WR 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


tiveness of up to 15D. The unit has a special repulsor unit 

keeping the prisoner suspended in the center of the cage. 

This bottom-mounted unit also supplies oxygen to the 

prisoner (there are no provisions for food and water; it is 

presumed that a Jedi will go into hibernation if he or she 

spends a long time in the cage. 
Jjerrol/40:4:2:55/Tate If somebody traps you with 
a Universal Energy Cage, you can forget about 
escape. And if somebody is using this kind of 
restraint on you, you can probably forget about 
breathing for much longer.... 


tetas? level is often much lower when not being resisted). Some- 
rire how, the cage emanates a special type of energy that blocks 
aitad Force energies and similar mental energies with an effec- 


bf PARN Zi 
` AT Aae 
NSSh nae 


res 


—_ 


Fibra-rope 
Organic Gill 
Shipsuit 
Spacer's Chest 


76 
76 
76 
76 


Tools and 


Miscellaneous Equipment 


Fibra-rope 

Fibra-rope is synthetic rope manufactured in 
small, thin spools. The rope is fairly durable, 
consisting of three large fibrous “cables” that are 
tightly woven together. These filaments are usu- 
ally between six and eight centimeters in diam- 
eter. While fibra-rope is bulky, it is capable of 
supporting up to 750 kilograms of weight. 


Fibra-rope 
Type: Standard fibra-rope 
Cost: 10 per 25 meters 
Availability: | 
Game Notes: Can resist up to 750 kilograms of force before 
breaking. 


Organic Gill 

Mon Calamari, who frequently remain under- 
water for extended periods of time, have long 
made use of a synthetically produced method of 
breathing underwater. Rather than using mechani- 
cal devices, a gelatinous, symbiotic “blob” is em- 
ployed. When placed over a diver’s breathing 
apertures, the blob serves as an organic gill of 
sorts, filtering oxygen from the sea. 

Organic gills can last several weeks underwater 
before they begin to die. Small microphones and 
earphones may be inserted in the gooey blob, 
making communication possible, if a bit muffled. 
Mon Calamari organic gills can be worn by most 
other species which breathe the same atmospheric 
mixtures that Mon Calamari do (except for 
Sullustans, who have an allergic reaction to the 
blobs). 


a 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Organic Gill 

Model: Mon Calamari Organic Gill 

Type: Synthetic organic gill 

Cost: 200 credits 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: While wearing an organic gill, a diver may 

breathe in underwater environments. 
Br'ng/40:3:09:2/Sule Not every Sullustan seems 
to suffer an allergic reaction to the gill; I sliced a 
New Republic medical study that indicated that 
one in six Sullustans can wear the gill. 


Shipsuit 

The A/KT shipsuit is a multi-pocketed coverall. 
The many pockets are useful for toting tools and 
equipment. The tough synthweave fabric lasts for 
years of regular use and is fireproof and electri- 
cally nonconductive (the suit is not a barrier to 
heat, though; wearers have been killed by a fire’s 
raw heat). A fitted shipsuit functions as a vacsuit 
or space suit internal body sleeve, allowing for a 
fast change into EVA gear. 


Shipsuit 
Model: Ayelic/Krongbing Textiles Shipsuit 
Type: General purpose shipsuit 
Cost: 200 credits 
Availability: | 


Spacer’s chest 


A spacer’s chest is perhaps the only thing a 
career spacer can rely on. Most spacers are tramp 
workers, moving from berth to berth dozens of 
times in a career. They tend to travel light, be- 
cause lots of personal goods slow you down, and 
because there's so little space aboard ship for 
personal gear. Most spacers tote their few belong- 
ings in a hardy piece of luggage, called a spacer’s 
chest, which carries their spare clothes, data 
discs, small tools, datapad, food concentrates and 
snacks, spare blaster and blaster packs, and per- 
haps a few mementos and oddities from their 
travels. 


Spacer’s chest 
Model: SoroSuub’s Wanderer Space Chest 
Type: Spacer's chest 
Cost: 200 credits 
Availability: | 
Game Notes: A rectangular, | meter long chest, with handles 
on each face. It can be locked with an electronic combo- 
lock (Moderate to pick), sealed against vacuum, and is 
quite durable: 6D Strength. 


Rytar/39:4:6:77/Khue Items like a spacer’s chest 
or a good shipsuit are often overlooked by fringe 
operators; they're too busy buying the biggest 
gun or the sharpest melee weapon to bother with 
“trivialities” like clothing and storage gear. Per- 
sonally, | like a shipsuit with a lot of pockets for 
gear, and a chest to store my bulkier belongings. 
That way, | always know where my tools and 
weapons are, so | can get to them quickly. 


Animal Excluder 
Anti-Insect Canister 
Automap 
Dehydrated Food Pack 
Gyro-Grappler 

Line Master TLG 

Luma Flares 

Med-aid 

Medkit 

Scout's Survival Pack 
Verti-Go Line Thrower 


79 
79 
80 
80 
81 
81 
81 
82 
82 
82 
83 


Survival Equipment 


Animal Excluder 


Normally, a scout’s job is to blend in with 
nature and avoid causing too much ofa stir, and 
almost any scout worth the title goes to great 
length to avoid harming local wildlife. However, 
there are times when a native creature takes an 
unhealthy interest in a scout, and it was for these 
times that the excluder was designed. When acti- 
vated, this hand-sized sonic device generates 
waves of high frequency sound—inaudible to hu- 
mans and many aliens—that ward off most crea- 
tures before they become a threat. 

The excluder’s frequency may be adjusted 
manually to discourage creatures that are im- 
mune to the effects of the excluder’s default set- 
tings. However, some creatures—especially tena- 
cious predators—can become enraged by certain 
sounds generated by the excluder, (This can oc- 
cur immediately or after prolonged exposure, 
depending on the creature.) As some sentient 
species with a delicate sense of hearing (such as 
Wookiees) may be disturbed by the noise, head- 
sets can be purchased that generate a frequency 
to cancel out the excluder’s aggravating sounds. 


Animal Excluder 
Model: Merr-Sonn Excluder 
Type: Animal excluder 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 350 
Availability: 2, F or R 
Game Notes: The excluder has three power settings—low 
power (2D), normal power (4D), and high power (6D). Each 
setting forms a protective “sphere” with a diameter of 10 
meters, 20 meters and 40 meters, respectively. Every round 
that a creature possessing senses in the affected range 
attempts to approach, it must make a willpower or Strength 
roll (whichever is higher) against the excluder’s power 
setting to remain within the device's range. Failure means 
the creature retreats as far as it can until it is out of range; 
success means it can advance but suffers -2D to all actions 
due to irritation and distraction. Attempting to corner a 
creature, however, is not a wise move, as full flight-or-fight 
instincts remain in affected creatures. 


Homack/45:2:3:47/Bste We only had to use an 
excluder once, but boy, were we sure glad we 
brought on with us. We had gotten stuck on Hethar, 
checking out a small Imperial contingent there. 
After dark, we settled down to sleep. Well, there 


was four of use on duty, each of us with an ex- 
cluder for emergencies. | heard a fluttering sound 
and a screech, and a pack of shredder bats at- 
tacked us. We had to be quiet...a blaster shot 
would have given us away to the Imps. Almost in 
unison, we turned on those excluders. Shredder 
bats literally fell out of the sky as their senses got 
scrambled. We disposed of them before anyone 
else woke up. They were really impressed with 
breakfast—said it was the best meal they ever 
had. 


Anti-Insect Canister 


The anti-insect canister is a sealed container 
filled with a unique microorganism discovered in 
the dense southern jungles of the planet Barkhesh. 
Highly specialized, these organisms are airborne 
and infest any local insect life in the area, congre- 
gating inside the insect’s body and digesting the 
luckless creature from within. Fortunately, these 
little creature show no interest in snacking on 
higher forms of life and have a relatively short 
lifespan once released from their container, thus 
preventing potential ecological disasters that 
might result from their diet. The microorganisms 
also cannot reproduce outside their jungle envi- 
ronment on Barkhesh—once they've eliminated 
the local insect population, they die off. 

The contents of the canister may be sprayed 
onto uniforms, some equipment or shelters which 
have become insect-infested, or it may be sprayed 
into the air surrounding the scout's base camp or 
work area. The effects of an anti-insect canister 
generally last from one to five days, depending on 
whether or not the microorganisms were sprayed 
directly onto a surface (effective but short-last- 
ing) or sprayed into the atmosphere. The microor- 
ganisms die quickly as they scatter—releasing the 
canister’s contents in a windy environment is a 
futile gesture. 

Sentient insect aliens subjected to the microor- 
ganisms experience an odd irritation beneath their 
carapaces, but are in no danger of dying. Such 
aliens are often quite disturbed if they learn of the 
canister’s true nature. 


These canisters are often available only on 
Barkhesh, where the microorganisms thrive in 
the humid jungle atmosphere. The canisters are 
also specially designed to provide the microor- 
ganisms with a minimal food source to sustain 
life—the microorganisms can live up to one month 
inside the canister’s environment before dying 
and becoming useless. 


Anti-insect Canister 
Model: Barkhesh Insect Culture 
Type: Insecticide 
Cost: 275 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: A canister's contents can coat three full-sized 
humans or protect the atmosphere within a small ship or 
within several meters of a small camp. The canister is 
effective up to one month from purchase, when the micro- 
organisms inside eventually die out. 


Ulmac/41:5:8:48/Gare Some environmentalists on 
Rodia have been clogging the HoloNet about this 
little gadget—they say it may wipe out a rare 
insect lifeform or something. Personally, | hate 
bugs; the less of them there are out there, the 
happier I'll be. I've seen bugs eat some of my pals 
alive...literally. When it comes down to a choice 
between me or the insects.... 


Key'lya/41:7:3:21/Kote A Bothan company is de- 
veloping similar anti-insect canisters for commer- 
cial sale. Personally, I've found such canisters 
useful for spraying stun gas or other paralyzing 
agent. Swapping the “bug juice” out for a more 
practical compound isn’t very difficult. 


Automap 


The Automap is roughly the size of a large 
datapad, dominated by a backlit display. The 
device allows the user to keep track of movement 
on the ground, as well as allowing the user to flag 
certain areas as trouble spots or hazards. The 
screen is hinged, so it can fold up at an angle to 
allow easier readability, and the readout’s bright- 
ness is adjustable, so it can be read without at- 
tracting unwanted attention at night. The upper 
left corner of the screen features a navigational 
bearing indicator that shows the direction and 
speed the user is traveling. 


Automap 
Model: SoroSuub “Tracker” GPS Module 
Type: Global positioning system 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 2,000 credits 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: It is virtually impossible for a character using 
an Automap to get lost. As long as the device is linked to an 
orbiting source of data (such as a ship's sensors or weather 
satellite) the device relays accurate data regarding the 
user's location, local weather conditions, other moving 
objections and navigational hazards. The link requires a 
Moderate computer programming/repair roll once per hour 
to maintain. Failure indicates that the link has been termi- 
nated and the device will extrapolate the character's posi- 
tion with marginal accuracy, (Unlinked automaps produce 
faulty position data on anything less than a Difficult com- 
puter programming/repair roll.) 


Hoska/39:3:1:11/Nale A slicer friend of mine came 
up with the sneakiest application for an automap 
that I've ever seen. He was helping amerc unit take 
out a slaver who had made planetfall for a drop off. 
The slaver patched his automap into the scanners 
of his orbiting ship...and my slicer pal sliced into 
the computer link. He guided the slaver into an 
ambush by simply sending bogus GPS data to the 
automap...and slaver-boy didn’t have a clue. 


Drell/39:4:0:21/Pare Kind of serves the slaver 
right. Personally, | never trust open computer 
links like that. Asecure link—like weather satellite 
or other government-monitored hook-up—is mod- 
estly tamper-proof, but opening a gate into your 
ship’s computer systems is asking for trouble. 


Dehydrated Food Pack 


Dehydrated food packs are moistureless nutri- 
tional supplements that can be stored indefinitely 
while occupying minimal space (a major concern 
on most space-faring vessels). Unfortunately, these 
food packs—while providing sustenance—leave 
much to be desired in flavor. Spacers often pack 
provisions of “real” food (perishable foodstuffs) 
to augment a vessel's rations. Ordering a disobe- 
dient crewman to subsist on these “dry packs” is 
a common form of punishment in the military. 


Dehydrated Food Pack 

Type: Standard dehydrated food pack 

Cost: 2 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: Each dehydrated food pack contains enough 

nourishment for a human for one meal (does not include 

liquids) 
Yyintar/41:3:2:66/Else When | was working as a 
galley assistant on The Prishellan Dawn—a priva- 
teer operating in the Outer Rim—the captain man- 
aged to snag an old crate of foodstuffs: dehy- 
drated food packs. Of course, the captain didn't 
listen when I told him that the packs were Old 
Republic vintage and were likely spoiled. To my 
surprise, as long as the seals on the packs re- 


mained unbroken, the food inside was still edible. 
(It tasted like unwashed tauntaun feet, but it was 
edible.) 


Gyro-Grappler 


The gyro-grappler was originally designed for 
use in the Republic military, acting as an aid to 
scaling walls or sheer inclines, such as mountains 
or cliff-faces. The gyro-grappler is essentially a 
large grappling hook that is equipped with power- 
ful micro-thrusters that propel the hook (and any 
rope attached to it) forward. This thruster pack- 
age is extremely quiet and allows throws up to 120 
meters. 


Gyro-Grappler 
Type: Standard gyro-grappler 
Cost: 15 
Availability: | 


Game Notes: The gyro-grappler has built-in microthrusters 
that activate upon throwing, propelling the device forward 
in the intended direction. All climbing skills rolls have a 
bonus of +1D for characters employing a gyro-grappler in 
their ascent. 


Slagg/40:1:9:44/Kote The gyro-grappler is still a 
good way to quietly cast a line where you need it 
to go. They are extremely dated—most military 
forces stopped using them decades ago—but they 
can still be found in surplus dumps in the Outer 
Rim Territories. 


Line Master TLG 


The Line Master TLG is a portable, one-shot 
grappling device. The unit is a hollow cylinder 40 
centimeters long and 10 centimeters in diameter; 
it resembles a lightsaber hilt. 

The unit features a pop-up targeting sight, a 
retractable hand grip with braking controls (al- 
lowing controlled descents), 100 meters of ultra- 
light micro-woven synthecord, a small motorized 
winch system, and a hook for a harness cable. 

The grapple head is flat, flexible disk coated 
with a strong bonding agent. Upon launch and 
impact, the grapple head instantly bonds, creat- 
ing astrong seal in less than two seconds. The Line 
Master can be anchored to another object via a 
similar disk, which has a 10-meter cord. 

Pressing a stud causes the winch to take up any 
slack. The line can support up to 200 kilograms. 
While the hand grip is often used to freeslide down 
the line, the motorized winch can pull a full load 
up the line at a speed of 25 meters per minute. 


Line Master TLG 
Model: Line Master Tube-Launched Grapple (TLG) 
Type: Grappling device 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Cost: 800 
Availability: 2, R 
Game Notes: An easy missile weapons rollis required to fire 
the grapple on target. When the handgrip is used to freeslide 
down the line, the motorized winch can pull a full load up 
the line with a move of 2. 


Hoska/39:5:9:21/Core | ran across some pirates 
near Borleias that had an interesting countermea- 
sure to the TLG. They had coated the walls of their 
fortress with a resin secreted by some local wild- 
life. The resin is extremely slick, and the bonding 
agent that the TLG employs has a rough time 
adhering to it. 


Luma Flares 


Luma flares are a rocket-propelled flare. When 
the flares detonate, they spread a luminous com- 
pound over a wide blast area, completely illumi- 
nating the area (effectively turning dark areas to 
the equivalent of full daylight). A luma flare is 
practical for illuminating target points for blaster 
artillery, as well as for attracting the attention of 
rescue ships (luma flares are often used by downed 
pilots). 

The luma flare is a self-contained unit. The 
operator merely sets a detonation point com- 
pared to current relative position: a specific hori- 
zontal and vertical distance. When the flare is 
activated, the rocket propels the flare to the deto- 
nation point 


Ilustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Luma Flares 
Model: Salamini Chemical Munitions Model-3287 
Type: Aerial illumination system 
Cost: 100 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Maximum range for the luma flare is five 
kilometers vertical and 10 kilometers horizontal. The illu- 
mination lasts for three minutes, and an area 300 meters in 
diameter is affected. While not designed as a weapon, luma 
flares will cause 4D burn damage to anyone within 20 
meters of the detonation point. Anyone within 50 meters of 
the detonation point and who is looking directly at the 
detonation point must make a Difficult Perception total or 
be blinded for eight minutes. 


Tyrol/45:2:2:20/Deve A luma flare at close quar- 
ters is a great way to incapacitate a large group of 
armored opponents without hurting them. Just be 
prepared for the unexpected when you move in: a 


good set of sun-protection goggles will dull aluma 
flare’s effects significantly. 


Med-aid 


Med-aids are small medical kits that provide 
rudimentary first aid gear for dealing with burns, 
cuts or contusions. More expensive kits also con- 
tain anti-venom supplements and pain-killers. 


Med-aid 

Model: Jassim Design QuickMed 

Type: Emergency medical kit 

Cost: 250 

Availability: 1 

Game Notes: Med-aids convey a +1D bonus to any one first 

aid skill roll. Each med-aid may be used only once. 
Farrann/43:5:1:22/Nare A number of these an- 
cient medical kits can still be found in the Outer 
Rim region. Be very careful using any of the anti- 
venom or pain-killers, though: some of these kits 
are hundreds of years old and the medicine has 
lost its potency and may even be toxic. 


Hhintha/43:5:3;12/Bone The anti-venom actually 
becomes toxic after it has been sealed for too long. 
I wouldn't use any of the medicines at all, though 
collectors will pay handsomely for military-issue 
med-aids, 


Medkit 


The medkit is like 10 medpacs crammed in one 
box, with some additions for field surgery. Al- 
though it is better than just the standard medpac, 
it is bulky and cannot be carried around as easily. 


illustration by Storn Cook 


The durable, fiber box is 30 cm high, 45 cm long 
and 15 cm wide. It weighs four kilograms and has 
a shoulder strap for carrying. 


Medkit 
Model: BioTech Medkit 
Type: Enhanced first aid and care system 
Skill: First aid, medicine 
Cost: 1,200, 2,200 (black market) 1000 to reload medpacs 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: A medkit functions as a medpac that can be 
used up to 10 times. The diagnostics instruments in the kit 
can also be used to diagnose diseases afflicting a patient, to 
assess health, and for other basic medical uses on an Easy 
first aid roll. The kit also allows a character with the 
medicine advanced skill to perform field surgery (which 
exhausts the kit's medpacs). 
Dhar/43:7:9:35/Else A medkit is a must if you are 
looking for survival equipment. While it is bulkier 
than a medpac, it is much better for treating field 
injuries. A good medkit can improve your chances 
of survival immeasurably. 


Scout's Survival Pack 


A hodgepodge of surveying gear, rations and 
field equipment, these packs are nevertheless 
carried faithfully by scouts throughout the galaxy. 
They are highly recommended for scouts of all 
kinds, especially beginners and those exploring 
systems never visited before. Like their owners, 
most of these packs are unique and have accumu- 
lated all sorts of gear over the years. 

Despite personal variations, the most common 
items carried in a scout's survival pack include 
three weeks’ rations, three medpacs, a glowrod, 
macrobinoculars two recording rods, two ther- 
mal flares two breath masks, a fusion grapple, 20 
meters of syntherope, a holorecorder (12 hours 
recording time), a single person dichrome shel- 
ter, a portable moisture vaporator, a hand-oper- 
ated energy generator, a scanning kit for collect- 
ing soil and biological samples, and ajournal-style 
datapad. 

Most packs are built around frames so they can 
be carried on a scout’s back for long-range treks 
on foot. However, the more stuff a scout crams 
into his pack, the more he has to lug around. 

A fully loaded scout survival pack typically 
goes for about 900-2,000 credits (depending on 
what's inside), and may be quite hard to find, 
depending on the scout’s affiliations with a sup- 
plier, But, these packs pay for themselves in the 
long run, and more and more scouts are swearing 
by them in the field. 


Scout's Survival Pack 
Type: Custom survival pack 
Cost: 900-2,000 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: While each pack varies, they often consist of 
a backpack rig packed with any of the following items— 
breath mask, comlink, datapad, fusion grapple, glowrod, 
hold-out blaster (3D), macrobinoculars, medpac, personal 
moisture vaporator, rations recording rod, survival shel- 
ter, syntherope, thermal flare, The pack may also contain 
other items added by individual scouts customizing their 
kits. 


Gyazii/42:3:1:09/Csc* The New Republic has re- 


cently begun issuing scouts this type of survival 
pack upon joining the Scout Service. 


Verti-Go Line Thrower 


The Susuax Verti-Go system is a reliable, light- 
weight personal line thrower and climber. The 
entire system can either be stowed in a backpack 
until needed or mounted under the long barrel of 
a blaster rifle or similar weapon. The Verti-Go 
consists of a gas-propelled projectile rod, an as- 


Folding Grip 


Various Climbing with Handle 


Climbing Motor 
Heads with Thincord Spool 


sortment of grappler heads, a pulley gear ascent 
motor, and 150 meters of high-strength thincord. 

The climber selects a grappler head, checks 
that the line is secured to the projectile rod and 
fires the thrower. After testing the line against the 
climber's weight, the climber then activates the 
gear ascent motor and is pulled up. The motor has 
two speeds: fast and very fast. Users should be 
warned that the ascent motor, when set to the 
highest speed, is also very loud. 


Verti-Go Line Thrower 
Model: Susuax Verti-Go Climbing System 
Type: Line thrower and climber 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Missile weapons 
Ammo: | projectile rod, assorted grappler heads, 150- 
meter length of line 
Cost: 400 
Availability: 2 
Range: 10-150 meters 
Damage: 4D-+2 
Game Notes: The norma! rate of ascent for the climbing 
motor is six meters per second for a normal human with 
gear. The secondary switch climbs at 12 meters per second 
but is three times as noisy (reduce Perception difficulty to 
spot climber by two levels). 


Zeb/39:3:6:71/Kale Clearly, the Verti-Go line 
thrower was not designed with combat applica- 
tions in mind; it is a much more utilitarian model 
than most other line-casting devices. The noise 
from the winch can attract a lot of unwanted 
attention—especially creatures with sensitive 
hearing. You should only use the high-speed as- 
cent function in an emergency. 


aie ae 
í 


B'shingh 
Chidinkalu 

Cloo Horn 
Synth-Harmonica 


85 
85 
85 
86 


Platt/37:8:2:1/Gele The worst enemy a smuggler 
can face is boredom. Sure, you will probably have 
to fight off Imperials or pirates, but those are just 
moments of pure terror that punctuate extended 
periods of monotony. A good entertainment locker 
will help keep smuggler and pirate crews loose 
and relaxed.,.and therefore ready for trouble. The 
following selection of items are all easily portable 
and make an excellent addition to any smuggler, 
pirate or tramp freighter captain's equipment 
manifest. 


B’shingh 

The holo boardgame B’shingh was invented by 
military strategist Crat Dakerno after studying 
local uprisings on the planet Ab’Bshingh. Dakerno 
had accompanied the Imperial troops who were 
sent in to quell the violence. He witnessed the 
ritualistic tribal customs of two warring factions— 
the Farangs and the Waroots. Impressed by the 
natives’ centuries-old tactics, Dakerno created 
the holo game. 

Because familiarity with the ancient customs of 
the two species is necessary to play the game, it is 
rarely seen outside the more intellectual or mili- 
tary circles. The object of the game is to maim or 
kill your opponents and capture his base (the 
opposite side of the board) in a series of moves 
across the gameboard. A move may include a 
physical step in any direction (except for the 
tribal chiefs, who may only move forward), or a 
change of stance in preparation for attack of de- 
fense. Knowledge of tribal rituals helps the play- 
ers anticipate the randomizer’s move made every 
fifth turn. 

B’shingh 

Model: Dakerno Inc. B'shingh Holo Game 

Type: Entertainment game 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Alien species, tactics 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 3 
Fotakex/42:9:4:03/Ette | once played a high-stakes 
game of B’shingh with a corporal who I had met 
only days earlier during a routine garrison drill. 
He seemed to me to be a backwater adolescent 


Entertainment and 
Leisure Devices 


who was just getting his ears wet in combat, but he 
was fairly intelligent and loved the game. Well, he 
beat me so badly that I was the laughing stock of 
the entire garrison. Imagine, a corporal beating a 
commander. | kept my eye on him and by the time 
| retired, he was a lieutenant colonel. 


Chidinkalu 


The chidinkalu is a fairly large musical instru- 
ment almost exclusively played by Biths. It has a 
very low register and is used as the rhythm sec- 
tion by many jatz bands, It stands nearly as tall as 
the height of the average Bith. The base rests on 
the floor and is usually tilted back so the musician 
can reach the mouthpiece. Air is blown into the 
mouthpiece where it travels down the neck, into 
the body before angling up and pouring out the 
amplifying cone which faces the audience. Be- 
cause of its size, it remains an uncommon instru- 
ment used only by wealthier musicians who have 
a stationary studio. 


Chidinkalu 

Model: Gonidor Supply Co. Hand-made Chidinkalu 

Type: Custom-made Bith musical instrument 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Musical instrument operation: chidinkalu 

Cost: 2,500 

Availability: 3 
Kilowarr/43:2:1:09/Els* The chidinkaluis far from 
portable, but can easily fit in a crew lounge. It is 
also big enough to modify a bit; | smuggle small 
quantities of ryll in it all the time. The best way to 
convince a customs inspector that the instrument 
is innocuous is to sit down and start playing. 
Usually they are so annoyed by the caterwauling 
| produce on the chidinkalu that they cut their 
inspection short. 


Kloo Horn 


The Kloo horn is probably the most popular 
instrument used by Biths who play jizz and jatz. It 
is nearly three-fourths as tall as a Bith musician 
and is held in the hands. Its mouthpiece contains 
a double reed and the stem bends back on itself in 
an elongated “s” to connect with the top of the 


body. Within the body are different sections where 
the musician can change the pitch and tone of the 
music. The Kloo Horn is tenor in pitch and is 
mainly used as the lead instrument in the band. 


Kloo Horn 

Model: Gonidor Supply Co. Hand-made Kloo Horn 

Type: Custom-made Bith musical instrument 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Musical instrument operation: Kloo Horn 

Cost: 2,000 

Availability: 3 
D’al/38:4:5:09/Tate The Kloo horn is ideal for 
musicians that play in rough cantinas and tapcafes. 
Not only does a good horn have excellent pitch 
and tone quality, it doubles as an effective trun- 
cheon for when the audience gets rowdy. 


Synth-Harmonica 


The synth-harmonica is an electronic device 
designed to accommodate nearly every alien form 
in existence. It changes pitch at the touch of a 
finger running along its miniaturized keyboard. 
The instrument is only about 20 centimeters long, 
and the top, which is essentially the keyboard, is 
nearly four centimeters wide. The keyboard is 


pressure-sensitive and can be played by a digit 
with a centimeter-wide (or smaller) width. This 
way, is can also be played with a small baton. The 
underside of the harmonica had three pressure 
pads on it which are used to change the range 
from high pitch, to medium pitch and down to a 
low pitch. 

The amplified synth-harmonica has built-in 
speakers which, at their loudest, can be heard by 
an entire crowded room of normally chatting 
people. For those who are not musically inclined, 
the instrument also has a side switch which acti- 
vates any one of ten pre-recorded popular songs. 


Synth-Harmonica 

Model: Mikar Music Amplified Synth-Harmonica 

Type: Musical instrument 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Musical instrument operation: synth-harmonica 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 
Prydde/40:2:6:81/Llie The university of Rudrig 
just started a new music program, “Studies in 
Contemporary Non-Human Music and Dance.” 
Anybody looking to make some quick cash on a 
legal cargo run can turn a tidy profit running 
musical instruments out to Rudrig. 


Electronic Blaster Sighting System 
Holorecording Macrobinoculars 
Hover-Cam 

Infra-Goggles 

Jammer Pack 

PTP Link 


Snooper Goggles 
Wide-scan Binocs 


Communications, Recording 


Electronic Blaster Sighting System 


This small electronic device fits on the top of 
the blaster and projects a small hologram of 
crosshairs one meter in front of the blaster. This 
site helps the user line up his target with his aim 
and assures a hit every time. 


Electronic Blaster Sighting System 
Model: SoroSuub True-Site System 
Type: Electronic blaster sighting system 
Skill: Blaster 
Cost: 500 
Availability: 2, R 
Game Notes: Add +1D to blaster for site. 


Kris/44:2:4:19/Eri* This is one of the few SoroSuub 
designs that, if it had been introduced five years 
earlier, would have squashed the Rebellion flat. It 
improves the aim on SoroSuub blasters so much 
that it’s like firing a whole new gun. 


Boduri/44:4:1:12/Kale | disagree. The polarized 
lens filters in stormtrooper helmets obscured the 
holosight, so the accuracy improvement was mini- 
mal. Besides, in a night firefight, those glowing 
sight profiles completely gave away enemy posi- 
tions. 


Holorecording Macrobinoculars 


A number of commercial models of 
macrobinoculars are on the market, but a new 
innovation is becoming quite popular. Some manu- 
facturers have begun releasing combination 
macrobinocular/holorecording units. Prior to the 
introduction of these “dual function units,” users 
had to scomp-link the macrobinoculars into a 
holorecording unit, often resulting in software 
incompatibilities and glitches: the finished re- 
cording was often flawed. 

The new device retains the functions of a stan- 
dard macrobinocular set, including range and 
targeting information (on all but the cheapest 
models), but it adds the ability to store a holo- 
graphic recording of anything seen through the 
viewfinder. With the sensor attachments avail- 
able, sensor data can also be stored and recorded 
on the macrobinocular’s recording unit. 

Unfortunately, the cost of these devices is fairly 
high. Miniaturized holograph technology is ex- 


and Imaging Gear 


pensive, and only those who can afford “the best” 
tend to own these units. 


Holorecording Macrobinoculars 
Model: Neuro-Saav Model TT4 Holorecording 
Macrobinoculars 
Type: Specialized image magnification/recording device 
Skill: Search 
Cost: 2,000 
Availability: 2* 

Game Notes: Holorecording macrobinoculars provide the 
normal advantages of standard image magnification de- 
vices (this specific unit gives +2D to all search or Perception 
rolls more than 100 meters away). In addition, the device 
can record up to three standard hours of visuals on a 
standard data card. 

* Note: This item is not available prior to the Battle 
of Endor. 


Dykara/38:3:9:25/Csee At 2,000 credits, very few 
people can afford a set of these, but there's a lot of 
reasons to get one, no matter who youare. Whether 
you have to prove to a boss that you took out a 
mark and deserve your bounty, or if you're simply 
a trader with a lot of goods on your hands and 
need to show what you have without dragging it 
all out—a pair of holorecording macrobinoculars 
can save your day. 


SliceRat/38:5:1:12/Bote Yes and no. A good slicer 
and an droid with holo-editing capability can fake 
a holorecording with ease. Given the low resolu- 
tion of most macrobinocular holorecordings, it 
takes little effort to doctor up virtually any image 
you want. If somebody is willing to accept such a 
recording as proof of some kind, they deserve to 
be taken for every credit you can squeeze ‘em for. 


Hover-Cam 


Hover-cams free up users from having to hold, 
aim or focus a recorder at their intended target. 
Using small repulsors, hover-cams float about a 
meter above and slightly behind their user. They 
follow spoken directions to record information on 
a standard datacard. How a hover-cam takes di- 
rection varies according to how sophisticated the 
device is. They come in many different models, 
from a simple “family-cam” capable of following 
limited directions and serving the average family’s 
recording needs, toa “watch-cam,” amore sophis- 


ticated model which can be used for surveillance 
or residential security. 

Because of their maneuverability, reporters 
throughout the galaxy find them extremely effec- 
tive tools. Most reporters prefer the DLI-250 hover- 
cam manufactured by Data-Link Industries, as this 
model not only takes spoken direction, it also 
“learns” on the job just what sort of action its user 
wants recorded. Thus a reporter doesn’t have to 
constantly direct its every move, and an “experi- 
enced” hover-cam can be sent out into a crowd 
and be trusted to come back with usable, news- 
worthy recordings. The DLI-250 has a flight ceiling 
of 50 meters and can be summoned to return to 
the user with a beckon call. 


4 Illustration by 
2i 
B 4 Jerry DeCrotie 


Hover-Cam 

Model: Data-Link Industries 250 Hover-Cam 

Type: Audio, visual and holo-recording device 

Cost: 900 

Availability: 2, F 
Aiden/37:9:2:34/Chae It seems that every jour- 
nalist has a hover-cam these days. Even the aver- 
age citizen uses them to watch and record their 
families in everyday life. It doesn't bode well to try 
to steal something or stage an ambush when a 
bunch of hover-cams are going to turn and watch 
you doit. Make sure you have a diversion—a large 
explosion can usually keep the hover-cams busy, 
even if the owners are looking elsewhere at you. 


Gunman/37:9:5:12/Elre We used modified hover- 
cams to perform routine surveillance on urban 
targets. Slice in a little espionage programming 
and the hover-cam is an amazing reconnaissance 
tool. 


Infra-goggles 
These common night-vision devices decode 
ambient infrared and ultraviolet light and enhance 
the image, allowing greater visibility in near-dark 
conditions, 


Infra-goggles 
Model: Drolan Plasteel Infra-goggles 
Type: Infrared goggles 
Cost: 300 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Reduces darkness-related attack difficulty 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


modifiers by 2D. However, if intense light (from a glowrod 
or other sudden source of illumination) is shined directly 
on the goggles, the wearer must immediately make a Diffi- 
cult willpower roll or be blinded for 1D rounds. 


Jammer Pack 


The jammer pack was an accidental technologi- 
cal invention that is rapidly proving its usefulness 
in covert operations. Originally designed as a 
device to prevent unauthorized listeners from 
tapping into sensitive comlink transmissions, the 
jammer pack was less than successful. The unit 
produced a muffled static effect every time it was 
activated, and made conversations harder to tap, 
but also harder for the authorized listeners to 
understand. After a few million units were pro- 
duced, the product was discontinued. 

Covert operations forces, Imperial Intelligence 
units in particular, recognized the signal jammer’s 
potential: with a strong enough power source, the 
faulty unit could effectively drown out all comlink 
activity with high-gain static. Cutting off commu- 
nication lines is usually a necessary step in sabo- 
tage operations, and the jammer pack is a conve- 
nient and simple method of accomplishing that 
task. 

The original signal jammer was a small flat, 
rectangular box that could fit into the palm of 
someone's hand. It had input and output receiv- 
ers and scomp links, and a small input board so 
users could attune the jammer to the frequencies 
of personal comlinks. A small control dial set the 
amount of “background static” that was produced 
to foul eavesdroppers. A tiny, rechargeable power 
cell was located in a recessed panel on the unit's 
underside. The entire unit could be hidden in a 
belt utility pouch for inconspicuous transport. 

Imperial Intelligence added several features to 
the unit. The largest alteration was an increased 
power source, which produces high-gain trans- 
mission static on all bandwidths. Intel also added 
a computer input to tap into centralized commu- 
nications system to shut down all the communica- 
tions in a network. Both of these items were 
relatively simple to manufacture, but the cost of 


faai 


> 


seer =F 


" 


miniaturization made the unit more expensive. 
The existing unit will still fit into a small pocket so 
the comm tech in a strike team can carry it conve- 
niently. If cost is a consideration, a similarly pow- 
ered unit can be jury-rigged with a civilian power 
generator and scomp computer link, making the 
unit large enough to require a small backpack, but 
substantially saving on costs. 


Jammer Pack 
Model: Modified M39 MicroThrust ComTech Eavesdrop 
Protection Unit 
Type: Communications disruption unit 
Skill: Communications 
Cost: 1,050 (basic unit), 3,400 (Imperial modified unit), 
1,750 (jury-rigged unit) 
Availability: X* 
Game Notes: To successfully activate the jammer pack 
requires a Moderate communications roll. If successful, it 
produces high-gain white noise on all communications 
bandwidths, prevent any comlink transmissions within a 
150-meter radius. A successful Difficult communications 
roll is necessary to tie the jammer pack into an integrated 
communications network (such as the comlink system in 
Imperial Palace on Coruscant). If completed, the jammer 
pack produces communications-fouling noise that is broad- 
cast throughout the entire system, completely shutting 
down the network. The jammer pack can tie into an inte- 
grated network from any public access terminal, but this 
normally requires several additional computer program- 
ming/repair totals to successfully slice into the network's 
management program routines. 
* Note: This item is not available prior to the Battle of 
Endor. 


Gunman/42:3:0:00/Elre A good comm jammer is 
an extremely effective way to throw an enemy into 
confusion. Nothing makes a soldier more nervous 
than being cut off from the chain of command. 


Dellio/42:4:1:90/Nale | built a jammer pack into 
my freighter’s communications system. The last 
time I was boarded, | activated it and drowned out 
the comlink connection between the customs 
troops and their docking shuttle. It gave me time 
to jump to hyperspace while my crew took out the 
boarders. 


PTP Link 

A PTP (point-to-point) link is a multiple-chan- 
nel personal communications device. These de- 
vices came in a variety of styles and sizes, and 
were capable of audio transmissions only. The 
range on PTP links was fairly short; 25 kilometers 
was average transmission distance. On some Core 
World planets, the Republic instituted a program 
where PTP link transmission boosters and relays 
were built, though the program was plagued with 
delays, cost-overruns and malfunctions. Today, 
these PTP links are only seen on low-tech worlds 
(particularly in the Tion Hegemony) and are typi- 
cally only prized by collectors in more advanced 
regions. 


PTP Link 
Type: Point-to-point multi-channel personal communica- 
tion device 
Cost: 150 


Availability: 2 

Game Notes: PTP links can reach distances of up to 25 
kilometers. Average PTP links are simple communication 
devices, capable of audio transmissions only. More expen- 
sive models often contain encryption packages that help 
secure a channel that is in use. Such PTP links can cost as 
much as 1,000 credits, and require a Moderate communica- 
tions roll to use successfully. If successful, the channel is 
secured and cannot be deciphered. 


Helg/39:6:1:19/Soce Most modern communica- 
tion signal scanners have a tough time detecting 
transmissions from an old PTP link; the carrier 
wave is low-powered and out-of-date; modern 
communications gear just wasn’t designed with 
such primitive tech in mind. 


Snooper Goggles 


Aspecialized version of macrobinoculars, these 
goggles are attached to a headband that collect 
ambient light, allowing the user to see normally 
even in near darkness. Standard models lack the 
long-range viewing of regular macrobinoculars. 
Newer models incorporate photo-reducing sen- 
sors to accommodate rapidly changing light lev- 
els. 


Snooper Goggles 
Type: Night macrobinoculars 
Skill: Search 
Cost: 300 
Availability: 2, R 
Game Note: Adds +2D to search in low light conditions; 
goggles without photo-reducing sensors are susceptible to 
sudden flashes of light (the wearer can be blinded), 


Evann/40:3:5:12/Core If you're going to use 
snooper goggles, | recomment picking up a high 
end version that has the long-range viewplate and 
the flash shields. | was blinded by my own blaster 
fire once; the ability to compensate for fluctuating 
light levels is a must when using snooper goggles 
in combat. 


Wide-scan Binocs 


Wide-scan binocs are image-intensification de- 
vices that allow the user to see for distances 
greater than with eyes alone. No sophisticated 
computer technology exists within this type of 
device; image intensification is achieved by the 
manipulation of a series of lenses. Several control 
knobs on the surface of the device allows adjust- 
ments in focus and magnification. As such, wide- 
scan binocs do not require power cells. 


Wide-scan Binocs 
Model: Jassim Design VX3 Scanner 
Type: Wide view binoculars 
Cost: 100 
Availability: | 
Game Notes: Wide-scan binocs provide a +1D bonus to 
search skill rolls where the target individual or area lies 
more than 20 meters from the viewer. 


Kelek/40:5:1:89/Llie Wide-scan binocs are still 
available for commercial sale, and they are rea- 
sonably effective. They are a nicely inexpensive 
alternative to macrobinoculars, and are often 
easier to repair. 


Datapads 

Master Command Unit 
TerexComm DataSearch 9C 
TerexComm DataSearch 12C-A 
Unitech Patch 


Computer Equipment 


Datapads 


In the automated and computerized galaxy, the 
high-tech datapad is an essential tool used by 
almost everyone who needs to read and write 
information. Datapads are small computers con- 
sisting of a readout screen, input keypad, special 
function keys, a data card drive, an internal power 
source, and ports for coupling the unit to either a 
droid or ship-board computer system. Most 
datapads, droids and computers have compatible 
operating systems. Those that do not can commu- 
nicate with others though the use of simple recog- 
nizer programs. 

Datapads serve as personal secretaries, infor- 
mation organizers, input/output devices, map or 
data displays, and portable data banks. Even the 
least-powerful models can process information, 
store and display memos, and tell time with their 
built-in chronometers. All datapads share a com- 
mon operating mode with full-fledged computers 
and droids: artificial intelligence. Datapads have 
much more limited storage and reasoning abili- 
ties than the larger, more expensive machines. 
The majority of users, though, depend upon 
datapads for pure storage capacity and data han- 
dling. 

A typical datapad model weighs less than a 
kilogram and fits easily into a pocket or carry 
pouch, or snaps onto a belt. Besides the internal 
memory, datapads can store information and pro- 


grams on data cards. These thin plastic cards can 
record huge amounts of data to be passed on to 
another datapad user or for use at a later date for 
those who don’t want to clog the unit's memory 
with material they won’t be using immediately. 
Data cards are extremely durable and can be bent, 
dropped and exposed to weather without suffer- 
ing significant damage. 

Datapads run on small power cells. A typical 
cell provides enough energy for two weeks of 
continuous processing. They can also connect to 
an external power source which saves power cell 
energy. Some units have internal charge cells 
which can be recharged from external power 
source. 

The datapad screen offers a superior holo crys- 
tal display. Even when connected for a sensor 
array dump, the display provides clean, crisp 
graphic images of terrain or space features with 
little distortion or image blurring. In addition, a 
droid can communicate via the datapad screen if 
it is attached with a coupler cable or through its 
input/output retrieval jack. 

A datapad fits comfortably in one hand, allow- 
ing the user to manipulate the keypad controls 
with the other. It does not replace a droid or full- 
sized ship computer, but it does offer a portable 
work station for those who cannot spend all of 
their time at a terminal. For ease of use, datapads 
can be hooked up to audio or retinal controllers so 
the user can control the machine with voice or eye 
motion, leaving the hands free for other duties. 
Most datapads can be operated in Basic or any 
number of other languages. 

While not the most powerful machines, 
datapads have sufficient capabilities to handle 
the majority of field calculations and functions. 
They are portable, cheap and easy to use, and are 
a fine complement to droids and full-fledged com- 

puters. 


Datapads 
Model: Various companies 
Type: Portable computer workstation 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: From 25 credits 
Availability: 1 


Hoegler/38:4:0:12/Else The usefulness of the 
datapad can never be underestimated. I’ve used 
them to store astrogation coordinates, shipping 
manifests, autochef recipes, diary information. ..I 
even used the built-in time:date function to act as 
a makeshift countdown detonator for an explo- 
sive. Definitely worth the price. 


Master Command Unit 


The master control unit is a small flat instru- 
ment usually worn on a belt. It is used to keep 
control over a total of 25 different items, whether 
they be communications or primary defense sys- 
tems. They are very rare as they can be pro- 
grammed to master any signal within 300 meter 
range, more if receptor circuitry is used to extend 
its power. The surface of the rectangular remote is 
covered with numbered buttons anda code slicer/ 
takeover switch. 

The master command unit was given to only 
the highest government officials in the Corporate 
Sector. With this unit a person simply switched on 
the code slicer and takeover machinery to catch 
the signals of a specific system. When the light 
was green, anumbered button was pressed which 
then became the new controller for the system. It 
could be used to control every day items like 
lights or as an audio receiver, or it could be used 
tomanipulate mass security systems, Inthe wrong 
hands it could destroy a government. It is believed 
the last of these units have been destroyed. 


Master Command Unit 

Model: Authority Master Command Unit 

Type: Master control unit 

Cost: 100,000 

Availability: 4, X 
Gundark/<<ERROR: TIME/DATE NOT 
UPLOADED...NODE LOCATION NOT UP- 
LOADED>>¢ Greetings, loyal customers! The re- 
ports of the demise of the master command unit 
were not strictly accurate. I've recently obtained 
almost 200 of these babies that I’m willing to sell. 
They won't do you much good outside of the 
Corporate Sec; only the CorpSec boys are dumb 
enough to slave-rig entire buildings. Still, they can 
be highly valuable to someone interested in a little 
larceny directed against the CSA. 


TerexComm DataSearch 9C 

The TerexComm DataSearch 9C is a valuable 
administrative tool for any being needed to search 
through thousands of data screen units (DSUs) in 
as little time as possible. Shortly before the Battle 
of Hoth, a Rebel field agent discovered that the 9C 
could locate low-level encrypted files if it was 
coupled witha simple power condenser. The draw- 
back to this is that the additional power to the 9C 
will virtually destroy any program it searches. 


TerexComm DataSearch 9C 
Model: TerexCommDeluxe (DataSearch Engine 9C) 
Type: Administrative datasearch device 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 600 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: An Easy computer programming/repair roll is 
required to connect the unit. When connected, it adds 1D+2 
to the character's computer programming/repair skill and 
2D to the 
character's secu- 
rityskillwhen used 
tosearch for infor- 
mation. A Moder- 
ate computer pro- 
gramming/repair 
roll is needed to 
modify the 9C with 
the power con- 
denser. 


Slott/40:3:5:12/ 
Grie Try running 
the condenser 
through a simple 
power-flux regu- 
lator (which you can tear out of virtually any 
droid, vehicle ignition system and so on). This will 
reduce the chances of frying any encrypted files 
you want to dig out. 


TerexComm DataSearch 12C-A 


The TerexComm DataSearch 12C-A searches a 
system for information related to search specifi- 
cation. A general query, such as “stormtrooper,” 
will yield a large amount of useless information. A 
more specific clue, such as “stormtrooper garri- 
sons in the Yartexx quarter” will yield much more 
useful data. 

The TerexComm DataSearch 12C-A is similar to 
the 9C, but with two major differences. The 12C-A 
does not function with the power condenser modi- 
fication. It often shorts out if it is modified. The 
second is a matter of speed. The 12C-A is capable 
of searching through thousands of DSUs in less 
than three seconds. 


TerexComm DataSearch 12C-A 
Model: TerexComm Executive (DataSearch Engine 12C-A) 
Type: Administrative datasearch device 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 850 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Using the 12C-A requires an Easy computer 
programming/repair roll. The 12C-A adds 2D to the 
character's computer programming/repair skill when search- 
ing for information. 


Coryndr/39:4:5:60/Dele Don't even try and hook 
a power condenser up to a 12C-A, even with a 
power-flux regulator. | tried it once and the fire 
and explosion was, well, pretty spectacular. 


Tor 


F 
rig Ss ine eae 

Poa | eo 
yar Í its 


ae ae 


+ > h 
BAIR 


ek 


=e! 


. - re 
sé 
Po Pe 
Dit. 8 


5 
r 


sdz 


+i 


t3 


é 


UniTech “Patch” 


The UniTech “Patch” is a small device that, 
when applied to a computer system or network, 
re-routes any security or similar programming so 
that a break cannot be detected. This device is 
commonly used by tech teams and some Imperial 
technicians during emergency repairs when a 
breached or damaged subsystem is seriously af- 
fecting the operations of the whole. The “patch” 
emulates the signals and responses of the dam- 
aged system, effectively tricking the master com- 
puter core into thinking the subsystem is unaf- 
fected. 

The “patch” consists of a master, or base unit, 
and eight slave units that the user places at the 
junction points between the subsystem to be 
bypassed and the outside system, Some of these 
“patches,” used by agents of the Rebel Alliance, 


proved extremely useful in the acquisition of clas- 
sified Imperial documents: they allowed Rebel 
spies to enter and utilize a specific part ofa system 
and remain relatively undetected. 


UniTech “Patch” 
Model: UniTech Diagnostic Systems Diverter 
Type: Interfacing system bridge 
Skill: Computer programming/repair 
Cost: 5,200 
Availability: 2, R (restricted to governments) 
Game Notes: The patch requires a Moderate computer 
programming/repair roll to apply, and adds 1D+2 to the 
character's security or relevant skill. 


Gunman/41:4:9:09/Elre The “Patch” also allows 
you to make a healthy system think it is damaged, 
if used properly. This is an excellent way to trigger 
false alarms, douse lighting systems or stage other 
effective diversions. 


AccuTronics Encryption Package 
Alliance Communications Encrypter 
Code Slicer 

Disruption Bubble Generator 
Electronic Lock Breaker 

Fusion Cutter 

Master Coder Chip 

Portable Plasma Cutter 

Shipjacking Kit 

VoiceBox 


96 


96 


96 
96 
97 
98 
96 
99 
99 
99 


AccuTronics Encryption Package 


Modified and upgraded by the Alliance Cryp- 
tography division, the AccuTronics Encryption 
Package is another item intended for civilian use, 
but with the proper modifications has proven a 
useful tool for the encryption of some lesser- 
security datafiles. 


AccuTronics Encryption Package 

Model: AccuTronics Encryption Package 1a.44.87 

Type: Datafile encryption device 

Skill: Computer programming/repair 

Cost: 500 

Availability: 2 

Game Notes: Any datafile encrypted with the AccuTronics 

Package gains a +5 modifier to its difficulty number to be 

found, and requires a Moderate computer programming/ 

repair roll to crack the encrypt code if the password is 

known. 
Chello/36:6:3:35/Bote The security protocols on 
the AccuTronics are a little dated; anybody with 
some decent programming skills can make the 
encryption routine more impressive by slicing 
into the coding algorithms and change them to a 
base 12 system from its existing base 10. This will 
throw most rookie slicers off the scent. 


Alliance Communications Encrypter 


The only standard piece of Alliance privateer 
equipment and most Alliance military units, the 
ACE is used to encode transmissions so that inter- 
cepted communications are difficult or impos- 
sible to understand. The ACE also carries Code 
Quasar, a METOSP broadcast identifying the ship 
as an Alliance privateer. 


Alliance Communications Encrypter 
Model: Alliance communications encoder/decoder 
Type: Communications device 
Cost: Not for sale 
Skill: Communications 
Availability: 4 
Game Notes: The encrypter adds +2D to the users commu- 
nications skill for encoding or decoding transmissions. 
Code Quasar has no game effect per se; it's more like flying 
an ID flag. 


Capt. Rislar/43:3:5:80/Hare Oh, yes, we had one 
of these during the last few years of the Rebellion. 
We had signed on as privateers for the Alliance 


Security Devices 


during a low point in our career and had to allow 
an ACE and an Alliance observer. It wasn’t too bad. 
The ACE did help a lot when we received shipping 
schedules and other tips from Alliance Command. 
Despite that, you can imagine how fast it left our 
ship when the Alliance took over the government. 


Code Slicer 


As electronic locking systems grow more so- 
phisticated, so do the needs of criminals and law- 
enforcement officials. The code slicer was devel- 
oped to infiltrate the electronic hardware of many 
locks and literally slice the cabling that these 
security measures generally contain. While keep- 
ing the electronics busy, a low-power energy torch 
burns through the locking mechanism. In general, 
it takes between five to eight minutes to success- 
fully use a code slicer. 


Code Slicer 

Model: Duwani Mechanical Products UniSlice 

Type: Security code breaker 

Skill: Security 

Cost: 2,000 

Availability: 3 

Game Notes: Provides +1D security bonus in attempts to 

bypass or break through security measures. 
Vron/41:2:4:89/Ryd* Nowadays it’s an automatic 
fine and prison term if you are caught just carrying 
one of these things. They’re only good for break- 
ing and entering; law-abiding citizens don't havea 
reason to have one. The slicer can help out, but | 
think it takes a little too long and sometimes you 
just need something a little more sophisticated, 


Stabattz/41:3:3:01/Core What do you expect? The 
code slicer was an older design back in the days of 
the Old Republic. An electronic lock-breaker is 
better suited to most modern larceny. Still, a lot of 
places in the Outer Rim region rely on archaic anti- 
theft measures, so it is a good idea to keep a code 
slicer around...just in case. 


Disruption Bubble Generator 
The Bakuran people have had a long, difficult 
history, filled with corruption and political infight- 
ing. The corporate struggles on Bakura made the 


early settlers extremely dedicated to their own 
survival and security. Developing the early DB 
generators to foil any potential eavesdroppers, 
they remain extremely useful counter-surveillance 
tools. 


Illustration by Brian Schomburg 


These small electronic devices create a local- 
ized “bubble” that is impenetrable to sonic scan- 
ning and other types of auditory sensors. They are 
generally small gray boxes, though many have 
been built into decorative housings to conceal 
their true purpose. These boxes fit easily into 
most pockets and the device only weighs a few 
kilograms. The DB generator is activated by throw- 
ing asimple “on/off” toggle switch, usually located 
on the front of the unit. 

The device is very efficient, running for years 
off of a single blaster power pack. The bubble itself 
is undetectable, unless specifically sought, and 
only then by the total absence of sounds. How- 
ever, the bubble can be constricted to 1 meter. By 
creating some other form of noise outside the 
bubble’s perimeter, the DB generator can usually 
remain undetected. 

There are only a few of these devices left on 
Bakura and this type of counter-surveillance mea- 
sure has never been widely used off-planet. (Since 
there are several more advanced forms of scan- 
ning devices in common use throughout the Em- 
pire, the Disruption Bubble generator’s useful- 
ness off Bakura would be negligible.) The few DB 
generators that remain are the property of those 
Bakurans who are descended from the original 
families to settle on the planet. 


Disruption Bubble Generator 
Model: Bakuran DB Generator 
Type: Anti-surveillance Device 
Cost: 150,000 Credits 
Availability: X 
Game Notes: The Disruption Bubble Generator is capable 
of producing a small, quiet area of interference to audio 
sensors. This bubble is generally 2 meters in diameter and 
can only be penetrated by a very difficult sensors roll, The 
DB generators still in circulation are extremely old and 


extremely fragile. They should be treated as having 1D 

Strength to resist damage. If dropped, shot or handled 

roughly the DB must roll to resist this damage. If the DB 

generator fails its Strength check, it is destroyed. 
Shosk’irid/42:3:9:01/Gere I've heard about the 
Bakuran disruption bubble generator and I must 
say that it would be a boon to one and all. Imagine 
actually having a conversation without the worry 
of hearing it broadcast throughout the sector. I’ve 
been told they no longer exist, but | think other- 
wise. Getting your hands on one may be near- 
impossible, but it would be worth it. 


Kenda/42:5:0:21/Bake Oh, they still exist all right. 
Virtually every family on Bakura has a DB genera- 
tor lying around (typically disguised as a lamp, or 
concealed in a piece of furniture). We may not be 
under Imperial control, but paranoia is still a very 
prominent Bakuran trait. 


Lozara/42:5:9:75/Bybe DB generators are fairly 
useful, but the sensor “hole” they leave behind is 
easy to spot if you know what you're doing. Still, 
for quick conversations, it is modestly effective. 


Electronic Lock Breaker 


Modern security systems are quite effective, 
particular building security packages. Even the 
low-cost Fortress-7 electronic deadbolt system is 
quite efficient at keeping low-tech undesirables 
from entering protected areas, though with the 
correct knowledge and tools, they are not impos- 
sible to disable. 

More advanced systems utilize computer cod- 
ing systems that rapidly change sequence; the 
sophistication of these 
systems protects 
luxury homes and 
buildings from unau- 
thorized entry. The Im- 
perial Palace on 
Coruscant uses a com- 
bination gene-scan/ran- 
dom-flux code key se- 
quence to protect resi- 
dents and visitors. Au- 
thorized personnel are 
given akey thatis linked 
to their genetic code; a 
micro-scanner in both aes 
the lock and the code- Mike Vilardi 
key establish the keyholder’s identity. If the gene- 
code does not match, asecurity alarm sounds and 
all door locks are immediately activated. Overall, 
the system that protects the Imperial Palace is the 
most advanced on the market and was considered 
virtually foolproof. 

At least, it was, until the invention of the elec- 
tronic lock breaker. This device is essentially a 


i i $ -j 
i eee —- 


eB 
UPW E 


; 
* 
s 


high-memory capacity computer terminal with an 
independent power source and a key-code 
replicator input/output jack. Thel/Ojackis plugged 
into the door lock, and a large polynomial compu- 
tation is “spiked” into the security monitor pro- 
gramming. The polynomial keeps the main secu- 
rity computer “occupied” and “convinces” it that 
there is no security breach. The rest of the lock 
breaker’s computer memory randomly flashes 
gene-sequence codes at phenomenal rates, until 
the correct gene code to open the locked door is 
discovered. 

The electronic lock breaker also has functions 
for opening other types of computer governed 
locks, but programming for each specific type of 
lock must be pre-entered into the unit; its memory 
storage is not large enough to accommodate ev- 
ery type of lock in its database. 

Lock breakers are very useful tools for crimi- 
nals and Intelligence agents who often need to 
gain unauthorized access to a room or building. 
The lock breaker is capable of bypassing most 
security systems but it requires a great deal of 
power and a considerable amount of time. The 
unit produces a loud hum when it is operating, so 
the user needs a good deal of privacy to get 
through a lock unnoticed. However, with proper 
planning or diversionary tactics, it can be quite 
effective. 

New Republic slicers are experimenting with a 
counter-programming concept to deal with the 
lock breaker. Since the lock breaker randomly 
flashes through genetic codes, and thus is capable 
of producing virtually any genetic sequence, Re- 
public programmers are considering adding 
“ringer” codes to their alarm systems. If the lock 
breaker tries a “ringer” code on the lock system, 
the lock’s computer system will realize that this is 
a prohibited code sequence, and it will trigger a 
system-wide alarm. Preliminary tests have proven 
modestly successful. 


Electronic Lock Breaker 
Model: OutlawTech Lock Breaker 
Type: Security tampering unit 
Skill: Security, computer programming/repair 
Cost: 25,000 credits (basic unit), 1,000 (per security system 
profile software package) 
Availability: X* 
Game Notes: The Lock Breaker requires a Moderate secu- 
rity roll to activate and a Difficult computer programming/ 
repair roll to successfully determine gene code sequences 
in advanced computer locks. Specific system profiles must 
be programmed before use, but pre-programmed system 
profiles (which are quicker to enter and generally more 
effective than “homemade” profiles) can be installed with 
a Moderate computer programming/repair roll. 
* Note: This item is not available prior to the Battle of 
Endor. 


Red/40:8:9:43/Soce Word has it that once the 
New Republic found the free time, they were on 
this lockbreaker with everything they had. They 
were very successful in adding ringer codes to 


local alarm systems, but this tool is still very 
useful on most Mid- to Outer Rim planets. If the 
alarm doesn’t have a “ringer” program, it doesn’t 
stand achance against the lockbreaker. Be warned, 
however, that if you have one, use it how—people 
are getting smart and soon the lockbreaker will be 
useless. 


Fusion Cutter 


A fusion cutter is used to breach an airlock or 
the hull of a ship (for the purpose of boarding the 
targeted vessel). These devices are a little over a 
meter long and are extremely bulky and heavy. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Fusion Cutter 

Model: Borallis Metalworking & Materials PCW-880 

Type: Heavy fusion cutter 

Cost: 150 

Skill: Assorted Technical skills 

Availability: 1 

Damage: 3D 

Game Notes: This unit is 1.2 meters long and uses a 

rechargeable power pack. 
Dharus/39:4:0:12/Pare There's nothing quite as 
satisfying as slicing through the airlock of a prize 
vessel with ease. | always keep a fusion cutter in 
my ship's stores. 


Kloon/40:6:1:10/Core Attention raiders! | recently 
attempted a raid on an Ororo transport in the 
Colonies region and discovered a nasty surprise: 
Ororo is coating airlocks and exterior hatches on 
their ships with a heat-sensitive contact explo- 
sive. One zap from a fusion cutter triggers a huge 
burst of plasma-flame that will flash-fry anybody 
within ten meters. Be careful, grubbers: the tar- 
gets are getting smarter. 


Master Coder Chip 


Master coder chips have been illegal in Impe- 
rial space for many years. Any electronic chip 
with sufficient spare memory can be erased and 
imprinted with Imperial security codes. If prop- 
erly encoded, the chip will allow the user to over- 


ride voice, retinal and palmprint security circuits 
as well as allowing erroneous messages and or- 
ders to be introduced into the security system. 

This level and quality of imprinting can only be 
accomplished with an advanced-circuitry brain of 
a level three or higher droid or computer. Conse- 
quently, anti-droid safeguards were developed 
many years ago to prevent just such tampering. 
However, on worlds where droids are forbidden 
or uncommon, master coder chips can sometimes 
operate without immediate detection. 

Possession of a master coder chip is highly 
illegal; in Imperial or New Republic space, anyone 
caught with one is immediately arrested (or, inthe 
case of the Empire, executed). The device is a 
favorite among smugglers and pirates in the Outer 
Rim Territories, where anti-droid countermea- 
sures are not widely available. 


Master Coder Chip 

Type: Illegal Security Override 

Skill: Security 

Cost: 340,000 Credits 

Availability: X 

Game Notes: A properly coded master coder chip can 

override virtually any computerized security system. Any 

user gains a +2D bonus to security. However, any anti-droid 

security systems can generally detect the use of a master 

coder chip and sound an alarm. Any system with anti-droid 

safeguards can detect the use of a master coder chip with 

a moderate security check. 
Cholo/40:5;1:09/Bake The master coder chipis at 
its most useful on worlds with fairly low computer 
sophistication; in the Core Worlds, most com- 
puter networks have anti-tampering safeguards 
that can detect such chips with ease. Just using 
one in the Core is asking for arrest. Stick to places 
like the Tion Hegemony, the Centrality or the 
Outer Rim when using this kind of slicing tool. 


Portable Plasma Cutter 


A portable plasma cutter is a small, hand-held 
device that’s slightly larger than a standard hold- 
out blaster. A portable fuel cylinder attaches just 
forward of the unit's pistol grip, although the 
cutter has asmall internal fuel supply. The cutter's 
internal fuel supply lasts for four minutes, while 
the canister has enough fuel for one hour of con- 
tinuous use. 

An adjustable focusing device allows the user 
to adjust the plasma discharge for the required 
depth and intensity. Standard blaster gases are 
used to create this small, extremely focused 
plasma, whichis capable of rapidly cutting through 
blast shielding and durasteel. Each cutter includes 
a set of blast goggles; additional goggles cost 15 
credits. 


Portable Plasma Cutter 
Cost: 150 (gas canister: 20 credits) 
Availability: 1 
: 7D 
Game Notes: It takes one round per 1D of body strength to 
cut a two-meter-by-one-meter hole. (For example: a blast 
door with 6D body strength would take six rounds.) When 


used as a weapon, the plasma cutter causes 7D physical 
damage; a Moderate melee combat roll is needed to hit. The 
blast goggles or a blast visor must be used with the cutter; 
anyone within two meters without proper eye protection 
must make a Moderate Perception roll to look away or be 
blinded for three minutes. (If someone is blinded, an at- 
tacker gets +10 to hit in combat.) 


Yggon/39:6:0:23/Pare Looking for a quick explo- 
sion? Shoot the plasma canister with a blaster and 
boom! Instant bomb. 


Shipjacking Kit 

This type of kit is strictly regulated and nor- 
mally only legal for authorized skip-tracers. It 
includes access decoders and other specialized 
tools required to overcome the security systems 
of a starship. Skip-tracers, shipjackers and spies 
use these kits to force their way aboard starships. 
These kits are despised by free spacers and tramp 
freighter skippers alike. 

Unauthorized possession of one of these kits is 
a crime and is cause for arrest on most worlds. 
Many ship owners, given the chance, will fire first 
and look for the appropriate licenses later. 


Shipjacking Kit 

Model: Individual manufacture 

Type: Shipboard security code descrambler 

Skill: Security 

Cost: 8,000 credits to a licensed Collection Agency; 16,000+ 

credits on the Invisible Market. 

Availability: 4, F or X 

Game Notes: Adds +3D to the user's security roll to break 

through a ship's physical security system. 
Dobra/39:4:1:07/Kale | hate these things. A skip- 
tracer cracked into my freighter a few years back, 
repossessing it and stranding me on Reuss VI. I 
never did see that ship again. (Too bad, too. It was 
my favorite.) 


VoiceBox 


Modern voice-activated security systems pro- 
cess accent, inflection, tone, stress, and many 
other voice pattern characteristics for encryp- 
tion. The super-encryption and multi-sensors make 
the locks difficult to defeat. The VoiceBox is 
plugged into a lock’s wiring where is fools the lock 
by encrypting the user’s voice patterns with a 
copy of the authentication files. 


VoiceBox 
Model: BothiCorp VoiceBox Speech Pattern Duplicator 
Type: Voice lock buster 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Security 
Cost: 5,000 
Availability: X ; 
Game Notes: A successful security roll against the lock's 
difficulty rating is required for success. 


Telir/41:2:0:21/Csce | equipped my freighter’s 
communications array with a VoiceBox. By patch- 
ing my comm system into the ship’s computer it 
gives me limited voice disguising capability (which 
is particularly useful if a customs vessel is trying 
to get an ID on me using a voiceprint analyzer). 


Bioscan 


BlasTech Sniffer Weapons Detector___ 
CorSec Autoscan Weapons Detector _ 


Energy Scanner 
Force Detector 
Geological Scanner 
Lifeform Scanner 
Medisensor 
Medscanner 


Search-Scan 4 Security Scanner 


Tech Scanner 


- 101 


101 
102 
102 
102 
103 
103 
103 
103 
104 
104 


Bioscan 


Developed by research technicians from the 
prestigious Rhinnal Medical Academy, the bioscan 
scanner and diagnostics package can identify and 
analyze the biological composition and status ofa 
living being. The system consists of two major 
components: a dedicated sensor array and ahighly 
sophisticated computer analysis program. 

The sensors are arranged in a framework which 
can easily be lowered over a patient (although the 
various sensors may be dismantled and rearranged 
for other applications). The sensors must be firmly 
mounted to a stationary frame for accurate read- 
ings, The elongated sensor packages include full- 
range scanner, medtox detector, vapro-sampler, 
and doppraymagno scanner, all fine-tuned to pro- 
vide accurate readings. 

The sensor array must be connected to an 
analysis computer, which sorts and displays in- 
formation in either a holographic or flatscreen 
format. The bioscan has several practical medical 
applications and is capable of providing data ona 
subject's species, sex, heartbeat, respiration, 
muscle tone index, height, weight, temperature, 
approximate skin age, biological anomalies or 
variations, and the presence of diseases or vi- 
ruses. The bioscan is also adept at identifying 
various alien species, and has more than 1,000 
templates for normal specimens of common aliens. 

Though rarely found outside the medical com- 
munity, bioscans have other applications useful 
to those in the intelligence community. If well- 
hidden, the unit can covertly gather information 
on passersby. It can detect and analyze power 


llustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Scanners and 
Detection Gear 


sources, comm transmissions, hidden weapons 
and explosives, and other electronic devices con- 
cealed on or implanted within a subject. While 
obviously useful to espionage and security agents, 
the bioscan is not ideally suited to non-medical 
tasks especially due to the sensors’ short range. 
Those bioscans used for intelligence purposes 
are very expensive and must be handled carefully: 
any irregularities in scanner placement can easily 
result in faulty or inaccurate bioscan readings. 


Bioscan 

Model: Athakam/RMSA Bioscan Unit 

Type: Bioscan sensor array and analysis unit 

Scale: Character 

Skill: Computer programming/repair (set up); first aid or 

medicine to use 

Cost: 13,000 

Availability: 3, F 

Game Notes: requires an Easy to Difficult computer pro- 

gramming/repair roll to set up (depending on situation). If 

properly set up, adds +2D to first aid, medicine or Technical. 

Maximum range of three meters. 
Kris/41:2:3:44/Erie | used to work for a cantina 
which used a bioscan at their doorway. It was 
good for business to anticipate customers’ tastes 
and when we knew what type of alien was coming 
in, we could get a server of the same species to 
come forward and converse with the customers in 
their own languages. Of course, the bioscan also 
showed us the hidden weapons and electronic 
devices, so we could keep a closer eye on the 
miscreants. 


BlasTech Sniffer Weapons Detector 


Apopular hand-held scanner made by BlasTech. 
It is common throughout the 
Empire and the Corporate Sec- 
tor. Thescannerisasmall cube, 
with a scanning panel on one 
side and an output screen on 
the opposite side. The screen 
shows outlines and energy 
readings from the scan: while 
it sometimes finds weapons 
only through its detection cir- 
cuitry, for best effectiveness a 


fs 


i 


Rl 


theere 
. 
ARET 


skilled operator is necessary to interpret the in- 
coming data and make educated guesses about 
the presence of weapons. 


illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


BlasTech Sniffer Weapons Detector 
Model: BlasTech Sniffer Weapon Detector 
Type: Portable weapon detector 
Cost: 5,600 credits 
Availability: 2, R (restricted to governments) 
Game Notes: Has a search of 5D to detect hidden energy 
weapons or adds +2D to an operator's search: weapon 
detector skill (the operator must have at least 1D in this 
specialization to qualify for the bonus). The difficulty de- 
pends on how well someone has camouflaged the weapon: 
simply putting it in a pack is an Easy difficulty; draining all 
the blaster gas, pulling out the power packs, cleaning the 
weapon ofall residue and then disassembling it, and spread- 
ing the parts among several pieces of luggage, would be a 
Very Difficult difficulty. 


CorSec Autoscan Weapons Detector 


The CorSec automated weapon detector is 
found in many starports and secure installations 
throughout the galaxy. Due to its large size, it is 
deployed in fixed sites near public thoroughfares 
and transportation centers where security is a 
concern. Its petal-shaped array tracks individuals 
and vehicles moving within range and scans them 
for weapons. If weapons are detected, an alarm is 
transmitted to security personnel. 


CorSec Autoscan Weapons Detector 
Model: CorSec Autoscan Weapons Detector 
Type: Stationary weapons detector 
Cost: 7,200 
Availability: 2, R (restricted to governments) 
Game Notes: Has a search of 6D to detect hidden energy 
weapons. The difficulty level to detect weapons depends 
on how well someone has hidden the weapon using their 
hide skill. 


Energy Scanner 


Energy scanners are capable of detecting many 
forms of energy emissions and provide data on 
type, intensity, effects, and origin. This scanner 
can detect natural and artificial energy from stel- 
lar radiation, reactors, generators, passing 
starships and airspeeders, comlinks, and other 
scanners. 


Energy Scanner 
Model: Fabritech 9000 Energy Scanner 
Type: Energy scanner 
Cost: 5,600 
Availability: 2 
Range: 500/1/2 


Force Detector 


The Force detector is a machine capable of 
reading and analyzing the auras of people sus- 
pected of having Jedi talent. The Emperor's hunter 
teams used them to seek out Jedi who were hiding 
during his great purge. 

The Force detector is a three component sys- 
tem, consisting of a control pack and two sheet 
crystal readers. The reader is aglassy silver paddle 
a bit larger than a human hand. The paddles jack 
into the control pack. The operator holds them 
out, bracketing the subject, then activates the 
unit. 

The unit scans the subject from head to toe, 
and constructs a wire-frame hologram of the sub- 
ject, which floats above the control pack. The 
wire-frame is tagged with color-coded lines which 
correspond to a scrolling column of numbers 
hovering beside the hologram. These data pro- 
vide a detailed analysis of the subject’s sensitiv- 
ity, but a more immediate method of detection is 
present as well — a color-coded aura, which is 
superimposed over the hologram. 

If the aura is blue, the person is strong in the 
Force. The stronger the corona, the stronger the 
person is in the Force. Those who are not Force- 
sensitive do not have an aura, while those who are 
partially or wholly under the influence of the dark 
side have auras tingled with red streaks. 

Though they were designed and built to pursue 
evil ends, Luke resolves to use them for good — to 
seek out potential Jedi students and so restore the 
Jedi Order to the galaxy. The Force detector is 
extremely rare. Their use was carefully regulated, 
and the Imperials charged with hunting down Jedi 
carefully tracked the use of every unit. Less than 
10,000 were every produced, and most have been 
lost or destroyed in the decades since. 


Force Detector 
Model: Force Detector Unit 
Type: Imperial Force Detector 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: Use of the Force detector will tell a trained 
operator whether a subject is Force-sensitive, and whether 
he or she has any Dark Side Points (but not how many). 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Geological Scanner 


Geoscanners are primarily used by miners and 
prospectors. They can detect geologic character- 
istics like precious minerals and ore deposits, and 
underground features. They can also analyze geo- 
thermal, seismic, volcanic, and glacial activity. 


Geological Scanner 

Model: Fabritech 7000 Geoscanner 

Type: Geoscanner 

Cost: 4,800 

Availability: 2 

Range: 500/1/2 km 
Narseri/40:2:3:75/Nare For several years, |worked 
for a claims-jumper outfit on several ore-rich 
worlds. We used one of these Fabritech 7000 
Geoscanners to find the goods. We'd land on the 
planet at a likely spot, use the geoscanner to find 
a promising lode and get to work. Between that 
and our super-borer, we could open a rich vein 
and pack it in the hold before sector officials even 
had a clue we were there. 


Lifeform Scanner 


The Lifedetec bioscanner is an instrument com- 
mon to scientists and security forces. The scan- 
ner detects the presence of lifeforms and pin- 
points their location. This scanner can even deter- 
mine the species of a lifeform is species templates 
are loaded into the lifeform indicators. It is about 
the size of a portable computer and has a shoulder 
strap for easy carrying. 


Lifeform Scanner 
Model: Cryoncorp Lifedetec Bioscanner 
Type: Bioscanner 
Scale: 2,800 
Cost: 2,800 
Availability: 2 
Range: 500/1.5 km 


Medisensor 


Typical Medisensors are miniature ver- 
sions of the more powerful sensors of a 
typical medical station. Easily patched into 
these main sensors, the medisensor can be 
carried up to 2 kilometers from the medical 
station and still provide detailed, accurate 
readings. 

The device is small, flat and rectangular 
and extremely lightweight. There is a small 
keypad that allows the user to scroll 
through the data readout, displayed on a 
small monitor located on the unit's face. In 
general, the medisensor must be calibrated 
for a particular species; for example, a 
medisensor that is calibrated to Human 
standard will provide inaccurate readings on a 
Wookiee. However, amoderate computer program- 
ming/ repair roll will allow the user to recalibrate 
the medisensor. 


Medisensor 
Model: BioTech RFX/K Medical Sensor Supplement 
Type: Portable Medical Diagnostic Relay 
Skill: First aid 
Cost: 5,000 Credits 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: Medisensors are used to augment the diag- 
nostic scanners of a medical bay. Since they can access the 
medical database of a standard medbay, they are basically 
booster relays for the existing system. Anyone using a 
medisensor receives a +2D bonus to first aid checks. How- 
ever, a medisensor that is not patched into a medbay's 
computer only delivers a +1D bonus. 


Medscanner 


Medical personnel in the field make use of 
medscanners to quickly diagnose diseases and 
assess injuries. Medpacs contain very basic 
medscanners. Medscanners are small hand-held 
units—however, their sensitive instruments are 
easily damaged when dropped or roughly handled. 


— « 
=e = 


‘ 
è 
* 

dg 
vs 
{i 


Medscanner 
Model: Cryoncorp Mediscan 21 
Type: Medscanner 
Cost: 3,000 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: The difficulty level for using this scanner is 
the same as that for using a medpac—easy for Wounded, 
Moderate for Incapacitated and Difficult for Mortally 
Wounded characters. Successful use of amedscanner adds 
1D to first aid rolls. 


Search-Scan 4 Security Scanner 


The Search-Scan 4 is used by Imperial and local 
planetary governments for a variety of detection 
needs. The scanner is the size of a large chest—it 
is often wheeled around on a cart or repulsor sled 
and then transported to specific locations by 
scanner personnel. The chest contains a number 
of probes and receptors that are attached to the 
unit by insulated cables. This is a highly sensitive 
instrument and can often penetrate some forms of 
shielding. 


Search-Scan 4 Security Scanner 
Model: BlasTech Search-Scan 4 
Type: Multi-capable security scanner 
Cost: 9,800 
Availability: 2, R (restricted to governments) 
Game Notes: This scanner adds 1D to the sensor skill roll of 
its operator. It can help detect structural anomalies hiding 
secret compartments, and find can find energy signatures 
showing weapons, life forms, and energy sources within a 
confined area, such as a docking bay, cargo hold, or com- 
partment. 


Tech Scanner 


This short-ranged, hand-held device helps tech- 
nicians check out mechanical systems and helps 
them assess damage to equipment, including elec- 
trical system integrity, hydraulic pressure, en- 
ergy flux, and structural stresses. 


Tech Scanner 
Model: Drever Corporation's Techaide 
Type: Tech scanner 
Cost: 2,600 
Availability: 2 
Game Notes: The difficulty level for using this scanner 
corresponds to the difficulty needed to repair damaged 
equipment. A character successfully using a tech scanner 
gains +1D on repair rolls. 


Camo-Netting 
DimSim 

Droid Disabler 
Fingerprint Masque 
Malkite Poisoner's Kit 
Myostim Unit 


106 
107 
107 
108 
108 
109 


Specialty Equipment 


Camo-Netting 


While conventional camouflage techniques are 
generally effective against visual searches, they 
often fail when sensors are employed against 
them. To this end, Fabritech designed CN-15 cam- 
ouflage netting, a powered unit with the ability to 
conceal areas from sensor scans by giving the 
camouflaged area the same sensor profile as the 
surrounding area. 

This camo-netting consists of a 15-meter square 
metal mesh, with a small power unit connected to 
one corner. This netting is relatively light and can 
be handled by two people with ease (although one 
person could deploy it with some difficulty). The 
net is covered by flexible plastic scales coated in 
asensor-reflective material. This coating acts asa 
mirror, reflecting the sensor pattern of nearby 
terrain back at a scanner sweep. The 
individual reflector chips’ and power 
unit’s sensor signature are small enough 
to avoid detection by cursory scans for 
metal objects and energy sources. This 
form of camo-netting eliminates the need 
for different non-electronic camo-netting 
for each terrain type. Since this form of 
camo-netting relies on reflection rather 
than projection, it can be used in any 
environment. 

The camo-netting’s reflective powers 
also extend past the range or electronic 
sensors and continue into the visual spec- 
trum as well. Visual scans at long range 
simply pick up the reflected terrain, al- 
though closer inspection may reveal 
anomalies. This camo-netting is also rela- 
tively effective at masking items from 
ground detection up to 250 meters away. 
Once surface observers enter that range, 
however, the camo-netting’s presence becomes 
relatively easy to detect visually. 

The CN-15 unit is large enough to cover an item 
225 square meters (or 15 meters on a side). This 
enables it to conceal items of relatively small size, 
from an X-wing starfighter or a command bunker 
to a few landspeeders or even a blaster artillery 
emplacement. The camo-netting is less effective if 


three or more nets are strung close together, 
because the nets’ energy signatures begin to inter- 
fere with each other. Rather than reflecting the 
nearby terrain, several camo-nets used in tandem 
begin reflecting each other, giving away their 
position by emitting occasional bursts of static 
and registering as metal objects on sensors. 

Near the end of the galactic civil war, Fabritech 
halted design and production of larger versions of 
this camo-netting at the request of the Imperial 
military, who felt that such equipment could aid 
the Alliance. Because of its obvious applications, 
camo-netting was restricted by Imperial law to 
those holding an Imperial weapons license. Indi- 
viduals and groups which often use camo-netting 
in their operations include Imperial-sanctioned 
bounty hunters, mercenary groups and Imperial 
operatives. 


illustration by Storn Cook 


Camo-Netting 
Model: Fabritech CN-15 Camouflage Netting 
Type: Camo-netting 
Skill: Hide 
Cost: 3,500 
Availability: 2, R 
Game Notes: Camo-netting adds +2D to the difficulty to 
detect the camouflaged object with sensor-scanning equip- 
ment at ranges greater than 250 meters. Camo-netting 


offers no bonus at a range of less than 250 meters. If more 

than three camo-nets are used in tandem, the sensor- 

scanning equipment gains a bonus of + 1D to detect the nets 

because of the interference the nets cause. 
Fal’Orssk/42:3:5:82/Rabe Despite all of the 
Empire's precautions, it wasn't too hard to pick up 
camo-netting through black-market resources. 
Guess the Empire never figured out that Fabritech 
was playing both sides during the war. 


Gunman/42:9:2:11/Elre Camo-netting is an ex- 
tremely useful tool; not only is it good for hiding 
large objects—ships, vehicles, and so on—but in 
smaller quantities can hide individuals as well. As 
an experiment, we once tested it underwater and 
it actually worked fairly well (provided the power 
supply and transfer paths are watertight). 


DimSim 

“DimSims” are portable holographic projec- 
tors that simply project a “shield” of darkness 
over the user's face. Rather than attempt to create 
a false identity for the user, the DimSim is a high- 
tech way of concealing one’s face (especially in 
light of how effective computer imaging systems 
are at determining a thief’s facial features from 
beneath more traditional masks and such). 

When activated, the DimSim appears to project 
a solid wall of “black” in front of the user's face. 
While the user will notice a small haze in front of 
him or her, observers will only see the darkness 
and be unable to determine any facial features of 
the user. Thieves using DimSims can ply their 
trade with relative anonymity. 


illustration by Mike Vilardi 


The DimSim is a small cap or helmet, with a 
micro power-pack that snaps into a side compart- 
ment. The power-packs are the same as those 
which power datapads and portable computers 
and last for approximately twenty minutes of con- 
tinuous operation. 

DimSim 

Model: DimSim (custom-designed unit) 

Type: Personal holographic projector/interference unit 

Cost: 5,000 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Notes: DimSim will completely conceal the user's 

features. 


Aiden/44:8:9:25/Rime DimSims are great tools 
given their limitations. Unfortunately, most law- 
enforcement troops know those limitations and 
can exploit them. With proper deployment, CorSec 
can kept you at bay for thirty minutes, whereupon 
the power-packs ran out of juice and your identity 
is revealed. DimSims are best for break-ins or 
quick forays past sensors and recorders. Long- 
term use just isn't possible. 


Droid Disabler 


A handy item to have on hand wherever secu- 
rity droids are anticipated, the Mandroxan droid 
disabler fires a tight beam of phased energy par- 
ticles which disrupt a droid’s internal electrical 
impulses. Unlike a simple electrical charge, which 
quickly dissipates, these phased particles are at- 
tracted by the droid’s own mass. Clinging to the 
droid’s exterior, they quickly build up their charge, 
which further disrupt neural pattern flow in the 
machine. The result is a temporarily disabled 
machine, dead on its feet. 


illustration by Brian Schomburg 


Droid Disabler 
Model: Mandroxan Exports Defense Weapon EDWX-843 
Type: Anti-droid weapon 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Blaster 
Ammo: 10 (power pack) 
Cost: 10,000 (black market) 
Availability: 4, X 
Range: 5-10/ 30/50 
Damage: 6D (stun damage); +1D for each hit after the first 
Game Notes: When hit, droids suffer a -1D to skill and 
attribute rolls for the next three rounds if the target is 


stunned, otherwise, the droid is rendered “unconscious” as 
per the “Stun Damage" rules on page 62 of Star Wars, Second 
Edition. While no permanent damage is done, a diagnostic 
overhaul and power-up will be required to reactivate the 
droid. 
Fotakex/40:1:5:38/Ette Yeah, it works, but who 
would want to pay that many creds to stun a droid 
when a Jawa ionization gun is cheaper and easier 
to find. As a matter of fact, I'd rather just shoot a 
droid with an everyday blaster and fix it later; if 
you can aim worth a slag, a blaster is still cheaper 
than buying this hunk of junk from Mandroxan. 


Colla/40:3:2:09/Stae | disagree. A blaster will stop 
a droid, sure; a Jawa ionization gun will take it 
down, too. But the odds of frying the poor droid's 
circuits are pretty good. If youneed to recover any 
data from a target droid, the Mandroxan is your 
best bet. 


Fingerprint Masque 

A fingerprint masque is a small, palm-sized 
device, similar in appearance to a conventional 
ink pad. Its purpose is to enable the user to 
disguise his or her fingerprint patterns by tempo- 
rarily overlaying them with a biochemical screen 
or “masque.” This pattern be either random in 
nature or conform to one of several preset pat- 
terns entered into the device’s memory by the 
operator. The process of re-patternization takes 
less than a minute for each digit and lasts upwards 
of 10-12 hours, depending on the user's physiol- 
ogy. It is very difficult to apply a different species’ 
masque pattern onto a subject. 


Illustration by Jerry DeCrore 


Fingerprint Masque 
Model: Individual criminal manufacture 
Type: Fingerprint pattern alteration kit 
Skill: Computer programming/repair (to use) 
Cost: 15,000 (black market) 
Availability: 4, X 
Game Notes: The flip-top surface contains a liquid crystal 
display used to confirm commands and the display of 


desired patterns. The bottom half of the device's “pad” 

contains a small input panel and a “sensor pad” where the 

digit is placed while the new pattern is being formed. 
Shosk’irid/40:8:3:28/Seve Before gene identifica- 
tion became big, many places had alarms which 
could only be deactivated by a fingerprint scan. 
Now you'll only see fingerprint scans on small- 
time businesses or out-of-the-way planets. The 
masque is still useful for thieving—the overlay is 
strong enough to leave prints behind, and there- 
fore most law enforcement will see the prints and 
not look any further. When led to a dead end, it is 
usually to late to pick up anything else. 


Yusko/41:3:0:91/Gyoe Don’t be too cocky witha 
fingerprint masque. It may leave behind a print, 
but most investigators are smart enough to check 
the print for genetic information contained in skin 
oil—which isn’t left behind by a fingerprint 
masque. They'll immediately know that the print 
is a fake. 


Malkite Poisoner’s Kit 


The Malkite Ring—a shadowy group of assas- 
sins that operates in the Outer Rim Territories— 
specializes in the elimination of well-protected 
targets; typically, Ring members ply their dubious 
trade on wealthy merchants and nobles. While the 
Ring employs a number of different operatives, a 
particularly deadly “sect” has developed within 
the organization: the Malkite Poisoners. 

The Malkite Poisoners are fanatical about per- 
forming their “duties” and spend a considerable 
portion of their lives honing their skills. Often, 
many Poisoners live under aseries of false names— 
forever abandoning their true identities. 

Malkite Poisoners follow very specific rules 
when administering their concoctions. In fact, the 
Malkite “honor creed” specifically forbids a Poi- 
soner to use any other tools than those contained 
in the kit to strike at a target. 

The Malkite Poisoners only use one set of tools 
for committing their crimes: a Malkite Poisoner's 
Kit. The kit is a small duraplas box, completely 
unadorned. The kit typically has a sophisticated 
locking mechanism to prevent tampering. 

Inside the kit are the tools of the Poisoners’ 
trade: several small vials, needles, and aerosol 
spray applicators. Each vial contains extremely 
potent neurotoxins—virtually untraceable, even 
by modern medical scanners. While the poisons 
can be administered with the needles or aerosol 
canisters, the highest “honor” a Poisoner can 
attain is to employ the raw liquid poison from the 
vials directly, without additional tools...and with- 
out detection. 

The kit also contains four small electronic mod- 
ules, each measuring only a few square centime- 
ters. The first module generates a disruption field 


that overrides medical sensors (hiding any slight 
traces of neurotoxin and showing the cause of 
death as natural causes). 

The second module generates a “pheromone 
zone” that confuses olfactory sensors or organic 
“food sniffers” into believing food or drink is de- 
void of poison. 

The third module jams sensors that can detect 
foreign substances that are airborne; this device 
can mask the presence of an aerosol spray poison. 

The fourth module is a “heat-sealer” that can 
almost instantly close the tiny puncture wounds 
caused by the kit's needles. The Poisoner must 
place the module directly in contact with the 
puncture wound; heat-sealing takes three sec- 
onds and leaves no trace of injury. 

While the devices and toxins in the kit are 
extremely deadly, the Malkite Poisoners’ honor 
creed restricts their use; typically, the Malkite 
Poisoner must be extremely well-disguised or 
highly trusted to approach a victim. 


Needles; Needles can also be used to apply the poison; this 
requires a Difficult sneak check (to puncture the target's 
skin without his knowledge) and a Moderate melee combat 
roll to successfully handle the needle. Failure of either roll 
indicates that the target is aware of the attack and has two 
rounds to raise an alert or that the Poisoner has fumbled 
the needle, possibly exposing himself to the poison. 
Disruption Field Override Generator: A disruption field over- 
ride generator increases the difficulty—by one level—of 
(A) medicine or first aid rolls when a medical scanner is 
used to determine a victim's cause of death; the generator 
must be used within one meter of the medical and requires 
a Moderate computer programming/repair roll. Success 
causes the medical scanner to overlook any traces of the 
neurotoxin, 

“Pheromone Zone” Generator: This device confuses olfac- 
tory sensors or organic “food sniffers” into believing food 
or drink is devoid of poison (increase search or investiga- 
tion difficulty by one level if such a device is employed to 
detect the poison; must be used within 3 meters of the 
sniffers”). 

Scanner Jammer: The third module jams sensors that can 
detect foreign substances that are airborne; this device can 
mask the presence of an aerosol spray poison (increase the 
difficulty to detect the poison by one level; must be used 
within two meters of the sensor). 

Heat Sealer: A “heat-sealer” instantly closes tiny puncture 
wounds caused by the kit's needles. The Poisoner must 
place the module directly in contact with the puncture 
wound; heat-sealing takes one round and leaves no trace of 
injury (requires a Moderate Dexterity or sneak check). 


Toraaso/39:5:1:09/Dele I've heard rumors that 
there’s some kind of power struggle going on in 
the Malkite Ring's ranks. Who knows? Maybe these 
slime-lickers are in the process of wiping each 
other out...if we're lucky. 


Myostim Unit 
The myostim unit was originally developed to 
combat muscle atrophy on low-gee worlds where 
gravity control was not available. Employing a 


tesserae 


wOtrerer 


sensor field coupled to an adjustable, computer- sis ore 
ized electromyoclonic broadcaster, the myostim iy | on 4 
unit massages muscles, causing them to expand So i 
and relax in sequence. A myostim unit helps keep DERSE” -m 
low-grav world residents in shape by exercising Ha C 7 ~f 
muscles to a degree that the planet’s gravity can- 


lliustration by Jerry DeCrotie 


Malkite Poisoner’s Kit 
Type: Illegal assassination tool 


ooa 


Scale: Character 

Cost: 800,000 credits 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Notes: Concealable: The Malkite Poisoner’s kit is 
extremely small (+1D to hide attempts). 

H gartha Poison: The kit contains a small quantity of h gartha 
liquid neurotoxin; each vial is sufficient to kill a single 
target on contact (causes death within two rounds; there is 
no known antidote save bacta immersion, though once 
removed from the bacta the poison again takes effect). The 
neurotoxin is extremely difficult to detect, even by medical 
scanners; increase the difficulty of (A) medicine or first aid 
checks by two levels if the examiner is attempting to locate 
traces of the poison within the victim. 

Aerosol Spray: The poison can also be administered as an 
aerosol spray; the poison is highly lethal, and the attack 
must be made from within 0.5 meters of the target (roll 
Dexterity), failure to make at least a Moderate Dexterity roll 
indicates that the poison has contacted the Poisoner as 
well, and he or she suffers the effects of the poison. 


not. Users stay in shape simply by sitting in the 
contour chair myostim array., while remaining 
free to perform other more sedentary activities. 

Myostim units soon found use among body- 
builders and other athletes, who began using 
them to keep in shape without any undue effort. 
They could use the units for a few hours each day 
to maintain and increase their strength, while 
attending to other matters (such as political and 
product endorsements, personal trade ventures, 
lucrative holo-ad engagements, and even side- 
betting on their own events). Myostim units are 
much easier to transport than more-traditional 
exercise equipment and do not require the user to 
waste time in “tedious” training routines. It is also 
rumored that bounty hunters, mercenaries and 
other such individuals sometimes use these units 


to increase their strength—when they can afford 
the myostim’s high cost, at least 

Recent medical research has indicated that 
extended use of myostim units might have certain 
detrimental effects on the subject's health. Those 
who have maintained their physical strength with 
myostims and then suddenly stopped training 
have experienced extreme muscle atrophy. Even 
with regular exercise, these individuals lost their 
strength over time. Scientists also suspect that 
extensive exposure to a myostim’s sensor fields 
and electromyoclonic broadcaster affects the 
subject’s electro-neural system, asymptom which 
might vary in intensity from species to species. 
This interference can cause problems with coor- 
dination and judgment, especially in times of ex- 
treme physical exertion or stress. 

While medical examiners have not yet proven 
these theories, many believe prolonged use of a 
myostim unit is dangerous, and often cite the case 
of famed shockball athlete Gordus Grime. Gordus, 
a shockball star, purportedly depended on a 
myostim unit to maintain his physique while pur- 
suing his other business affairs. After a shockball 
exhibition game on Kaal, he went berserk, mur- 
dering seven socialites at a reception in his honor 
and mangling 17 more people before authorities 
put him down. 


Myostim Unit 
Model: Traxes BioElectronics Myostim Couch 
Type: Myostim unit 
Scale: Character 
Cost: 30,000 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: For every 12 hours spent on a myostim unit, 
the subject's Strength is increased by +1 (maximum bonus 
of +1D). The bonus lasts for one week. 
Extended use of myostim units might have psychologically 
damaging results in tense situations requiring sudden bursts 
of activity. After more than six months of use, characters in 
an extremely stressful situation may suffer a -2 penalty to 
Dexterity, Knowledge, Perception, and all related skills; with 
a mishap, the character becomes enraged and uncontrol- 
lable. 


Gyaxx/41:3:1:10/Hune The current research is 
right on the money: myostim-related muscle atro- 
phy is an incredibly debilitating side-effect. A 
bounty hunter I worked with used ‘stims to keep 
in shape. When he retired—and stopped using the 
myostims—his body just fell apart. He's still 
hooked into life support computers in the Avenel 
Rest Station medical wing. 


Retinal Disguiser 


The retinal disguiser is a visor-like device used 
to defeat security systems based on retinal pat- 
tern recognition. It works by projecting a false 
pattern overlay that accurately matches a pre- 
determined selection. This selection can be loaded 
into the disguiser if a copy of a known pattern 
already exists. Likewise, when used in scan mode, 
a composite of a subject's current retinal pattern 


can be stored for fu- 
ture use. It is very 
difficult to project 
a different species’ 
retinal pattern on 
an individual, so 
retinal security 
systems set to ac- 
cept only specific 
individuals of a dif- 
ferent species cannot 
be fooled by this de- 
vice. 


Retinal Disguiser 
Model: Individual criminal 
manufacture 
Type: Retinal pattern falsification device 
Skill: Medicine 
Cost: 25,000 (black market) 

Availability: 4, X 

Game Notes: Normal operation requires an Easy medicine 
total. In the event that a pre-existing pattern has been 
loaded into the device (rather than storing a live subject 
scan), the gamemaster must determine the relative accu- 
racy of the pattern. This may require the user to make a 
higher difficulty roll. Users deemed to be sufficiently profi- 
cient may attempt to manufacture their own retinal pat- 
terns “from scratch” if sufficient data on the desired sub- 
ject is available. Such attempts will always result, however, 
in much higher medicine difficulties. 
Heler/39:4:0:22/Elre The Ariana Precious Metals Reposi- 
tory on Woostri recently purchased Debri-X Retinal Scan- 
ners. Every time I've used a retinal disguiser on a Debri-X, 
the scanner has failed to detect the fake. Anybody inter- 
ested in pulling off a metals heist can contact me at the 
Broken Tusk, Lianna. 


Brian Schomburg 


Tri-laser Engraver 


A mainstay of the modern counterfeiter, the tri- 
laser engraver uses a micro-miniature array of 
laser beams to replicate finely textured incisions 
ona variety of metal and plastic plates used for the 
production of planetary currencies. By adjusting 
the angle, pitch and beam width of each individual 
laser, the counterfeiter can produce a variety of 
patterns virtually indistinguishable from the origi- 
nals. 


Tri-laser Engraver 
Model: Opirus Personal Lasers, Model KL-543 
Type: Tri-laser engraver 
Skill: Forgery 
Cost: 4,000; 8,000+ on the black market 
Availability: 3, F, or R 
Game Notes: Long-term close-up use of this device without 
proper eyewear can lead to temporary visual distress and 
permanent injury. 


Theonnrl/39:7:9:00/Bale The biggest problem 
with the tri-laser engraver is the brightness and 
power of the lasers. It eats up power at a tremen- 
dous rate, which can be detected by law-enforce- 
ment types if they are hooked into the local utili- 
ties network. (Even a good energy scan will detect 
it if you are running it really hot.) Unfortunately, 
most Imperial and New-Republic currency requires 
the higher power settings to duplicate. 


»py this page for personal use 


Permission is hereby granted to photoc« 


Quantity Price Delivery Preference 


TAT X72 Ne 


Item: 

Model: 

Type: 

Scale: 

Skill: 

Crew: 

Cost: 
Availability: 
Game Notes: 


Kir 


Yi , 
-a : 

\ 
: aa (i 


g ’ : 
Star Warsd Myke & © 1997 Lidtasfilm Lid, | 


` 
-_ 


Ve 


> 


TA) 
A A 


‘ 
Aaa shard o 


Tired of mucking around on wet jungle planets? Sick of 
roasting on isolated desert worlds? Want a taste of the 
good life? Come to Tapani sector and mix it up with the 
lords and ladies of the noble class. Forget dusty cantinas— 
yacht races, grand balls, and exclusive luxury resorts are 
your venue now. 

= Asaknight or baron, immerse yourself in the mighty 
feuds of royal houses—and uncover their secrets. Join 
a secret society, cross lightfoils with the saber rakes, 
_ or tangle with a shadowy assassin cult. Foil Imperial 
plots to undermine the sector, or help them along and 
reap the rewards of loyalty to the Emperor. 
Or, if sitting in the lap of luxury isn’t 
€ your thing, sniff out the hidden fringe 
| ports and cut yourself a piece of the 
action. Take on the powerful Mining 
Guild. Smuggle bootleg bacta down 
the Shapani Bypass or steal data from 
the ivory halls of Mrisst. Establish your 

own Rebel cell and rock the sector. 


ZampaigniSe ino 1 
IW lest End oi mes 
EST © AS 
END wet. 
” WANE es. —_ 


eran Ee enero FEMEIE E trademark laws. Al Rights Reserved. Used Unter Authurizutios 


GUNDARK’ S 


FANTASTIC. — 
TECHNOLOGY = 


PERSONAL GEAR 


_"“Gundark” is one of the most notorious ieai” Cl 
dealers in the galaxy, wantéd by virtually every law- 
enforcement agéacy in,snown space...and now, forthe _ 
first time, his catalóg of illicit wares is available to you. 
From the ABC santi-personnel canister to the Z2-stun 
baton, Fantastic Technology: Personal Gear contains 
detailed game statistics and inforfnation’ on scores of 
itemss weapons, armor, security ‘mechanisms, 
computers, explosives, cdcimunicarions equipment, and 
other ` specialty devices.” 

. ` Take d tour of the black marker, where anything can 

$ i IE right price. 


Pies `a (Fantastic irok Personal Gear contains material compiled 
Sn Par es from previously» published Star Wars roleplaying products.) 


re AGTTARS WARS 
Tee peat "8 Mi oho Nf 


For ages 12 and up. 


ka 


TM or ® G © 1997 Lucasfilm Lid. Title and character and place names protected by all applicoble mademaik laws 
All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization 


