MUU LIULLU 


HUVULLUITU Û Û Û 


CONTENTS 


Introduction .....................,.....- ee eee ene rene reno sr nun ss sons dips З 
10 


Vested Interest .. 


There's Many A Slip Betwixt Cup and Lip .....................13 
Harvest Day ................ e eene canana annealing supra ones bnn D 
The Passage from Perdition.......... 2n 21 


A Line in the Sand ....................-..4,e cene eese eene nnn natae 2D 


New Republic Adventure Hooks ...................... «6...0. 31 


Design: Floyd Wesel • Editing and Development: Bill Smith • Graphics: Brian Schomburg * Cover 
Art: LFL * Interior Art: Christopher Trevas * Additional Illustrations: Paul Jaquays, Brian Schomburg 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter « Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter • Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran » 
Editors: Peter Schweighofer, Bill Smith, George Strayton, Paul Sudlow, Eric S. Trautmann * Editorial Assistant: Jen Seiden * Graphic Artists: 
Tim Bobko, Tom ONeill, Brian Schomburg * Sales Manager: Jeff Kent + Sales Assistant: Carl Klinger * Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden 
Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill Accounting: Karen Bayly, Mary Galant, Wendy Lord * Billing: Sue Hartung 


Published by 


es 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40212 


®, TM & € 1997 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Christopher Trevas 


The speeder stops on a bluff overlooking the spaceport at 
Mos Eisley. It is a haphazard array of low, grey, concrete 
structures and semi-domes. A harsh gale blows across the 
stark canyon floor. Luke walks to the edge of the cragoy 
bluff where Ben is standing. 


"Mos Eisley Spaceport. You will never find a 
more wretched hive of scum and villainy. 
We must be coutious." 


—Ben Kenobi 


Introduction 


Introduction 


It's a desert spaceport teeming with Jawas, strange 
aliens, and dangerous criminals. Welcome to Mos 
Eisley, a city of mystery, intrigue ... and adventure! 

Every Star Wars gaming group shares the desire to 
experience this exotic location. This boxed set helps 
you do just that with adventures, characters and 
locations for your players to explore. 

This box contains: 


* This adventure book. The adventures in this booklet 
are designed two to six characters, preferably those 
with strong Rebel Alliance sympathies. Players may 
use smugglers or other independent characters, al- 
though you may haveto adjust the motivation for each 
adventure to get the characters involved. 

While most of these adventures are set shortly after 
the events of Star Wars: A New Hope, they can be 
customized to suit other eras, depending upon when 
your game campaign is set. 


* Galaxy Guide 7: Mos Eisley provides a detailed look at 
some of the personalities and locations to be found in 
the spaceport city. While not exhaustive, this book 
provides plenty of starting points for adventures. Gal- 
axy Guide 715 set a few months after the events of Star 
Wars: A New Hope. 


* A 17" x 22" two-sided, color map featuring downtown 
Mos Eisley and the infamous cantina. 

The cantina map is scaled roughly to match the 
scale of the metal miniatures: 1 inch represents two 
meters. By using the map, miniatures and counters, 
players and gamemasters can indicate exactly where 
their characters are at critical points during adven- 
tures. 

The other side of the map shows part of Mos Eisley's 
crowded downtown spaceport, including the Mos 
Eisley Cantina, Docking Bay 94, Jabba the Hutt’s 
Townhouse and a number of business and shops 
characters may need to visit. The rough scale is 1 inch 
represents 18 meters (one inch on this map is equiva- 
lent to nine inches in standard miniatures battles 
scale). 


* A set of 12 Star Wars miniatures. Each miniature 
figure represents a specific individual from the Star 
Wars movies. These miniatures can be used for other 
characters, as well. For example, altering the paint 
scheme of the Greedo figure allows it to represent any 
Rodian. 

Aside from painting and collecting, miniatures have 
practical value in both roleplaying and miniatures 
games, as they are used to show the actual locations of 


characters during battles and other intense scenes. 
Use of miniatures allows players and the gamemaster 
to better visualize these situations. Miniatures also 
add a lot more fun to most game sessions, since 
players tend to get into the spirit of the game and move 
their figures around on the map. 


The Miniatures 


Below is a description of each miniature included in 
this set, with game stats as of the events shown in Star 
Wars: A New Hope. Each entry also includes hints for 
using the miniature in other roles. 


Han Solo 

Aninfamous Corellian smug- 
gler, Solo is the captain of the 
Millennium Falcon. Heis known 
for his piloting skills and bra- 
vado. While the Falcon looks 
less than spaceworthy, it's one 
of the fastest ships in the space 
lanes. Unfortunately, Solo can't 
outrun the trouble he inherited when he was forced to 
dump a shipment of Jabba the Hutt's spice. Jabba has 
since posted a huge bounty on Solo’s head! 


Painting Tips. Solo's vest is black; his pants are 
dark blue with a red Corellian Bloodstripe. His shirt is 
white. 


m Hon Solo 


Type: Smuggler 

DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Blaster 6D+2, blaster: heavy blaster pistol 9D+1, blaster: blaster 
rifle 5D+1, blaster artillery 6D«1, brawling parry 6D, dodge 8D, 
grenade 5D+1, melee combat 6D+1, melee parry 5D, missile 
weapons 4D, pick pocket 4D+1, running 3D+2, vehicle blasters 
6D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Alien species 6D, bureaucracy 5D, business 4D, busine: mug- 
glers 5D, cultures 4D, intimidation 5D+1, languages 5D, law 
enforcement 5D, planetary systems 7D, streetwise 7D, streetwise: 
Jabba the Hutt's organization 8D+2, survival 6D, value 5D, will- 
power 3D 

MECHANICAL 3D+2 

Astrogation 8D, beast riding 5D+2, capital ship gunnery 5D+1, 
capital ship piloting 7D, capital ship shields 4D«1, communica- 
tions 4D, ground vehicle operation 4D+2, repulsorlift operation 
7D, sensors 4D-2, space transports 6D+2, space transports: YT- 
1300 transports 10D, starfighter piloting 5D+1, starship gunnery 
9D, starship shields 6D+2, swoop operation 6D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 8D, command 6D, con 8D, forgery 5D, forgery: ship IDs 7D, 
gambling 8D, hide 7D+1, persuasion 5D, search 5D+2, sneak 4D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 7D, climbing/jumping 6D, lifting 5D«1, stamina 7D, 
swimming 4D+2 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 3 


TECHNICAL 2D+2 

Blaster repair 4D, computer programming/repair 7D, demolition 

4D+2, droid programming 5D, droid repair 5D, ground vehicle 

repair 3D, repulsorlift repair 7D, security 7D, space transports 

repair 5D, spacetransports repair: YT-1300 transports 9D, starship 

weapon repair 4D 

Force Points: 2 

Character Points: 22 

Move: 10 

Eguipment: Heavy blaster pistol (5D), comlink 

Other Personas. This figure can be used for any 
civilian, including a smuggler, a thug, a mercenary or 
a security officer. Any color combinations are suit- 
able. 


Predne Balu. One of Mos Eisley's Assistant Security 
Officers, Balu can often be seen scouring the city 
streets. (Balu appears in several of the adventures in 
this booklet as wellas the story "Nightlily" in the Tales 
from the Mos Eisley Cantina anthology.) Predne Balu 
has dark blue pants and vest, a gray shirt, and a tan 
holster and belts. He has black hair and eyes, with a 
gray beard. 


Chewbacca 

This towering Wookiee is 
the partner of Han Solo and 
first mate aboard the Millen- 
nium Falcon. While speculation 
runs rampant about how he 
and Solo teamed-up, no one 
disputes their loyalty to each 
other. Chewbacca is an out- 
standing starship mechanic, but he's more widely 
known for his short temper and his considerable com- 
bat abilities. He carries a bowcaster. 


Painting Tips. Chewbacca has dark brown fur and 
blue eyes. His bandolier and bowcaster are black; the 
bowcaster ammunition packs (on the bandolier) are 
sliver. 


m Chewbacca 
Type: Wookiee 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Blaster 5D+2, bowcaster 9D, brawling parry 7D, dodge 6D, gre- 
nade 5D, melee combat 8D, melee parry 8D, vehicle blasters 6D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Alien species 6D+2, bureaucracy 4D, business 4D, cultures 3D+1, 
intimidation 8D«2, languages 5D+2, planetary systems 7D, 
streetwise 6D+1, survival 7D, value 7D+1 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Astrogation 8D, beast riding 4D, communications 3D+1, 
repulsorlift operation 7D, sensors 5D, space transports 6D+1, 
space transports: YT-1300 transports 8D, starship gunnery 7D, 
starship shields 6D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 5D, command 4D+2, gambling 4D+1, hide 3D, search 3D, 
sneak 3D 
STRENGTH 5D 
Brawling 10D, climbing/jumping 7D, lifting 9D, stamina 10D, 
swimming 7D 
TECHNICAL 3D+1 
Blaster repair 5D+1, bowcaster repair 5D+2, computer program- 
ming/repair 8D, demolition 5D+2, droid programming 7D, droid 
repair 6D, first aid 5D, repulsorlift repair 6D, security 6D+1, space 
transports repair 6D+2, space transports repair: YT-1300 trans- 
ports 10D+2 


Introduction 


Special Abilities: 

Berserker Rage: Chewbacca gains «2D Strength when brawling in 

berserker rage. See page 218 of Star Wars, Revised and Expanded. 

Climbing Claws: «2D to climbing. 

Force Points: 1 

Character Points: 16 

Move: 13 

Equipment: Bowcaster (4D), ammo bandoleer, droid tool kit, 

starship tool kit, waist pouch 

Other Personas. This figure can represent any 
Wookiee character. Wookiee fur can betan, black, gray 
or even white, although brown is the most common 
color. Wookiees often have blue, black or gold eyes. 


Chalmun. The charismatic Wookiee who owns the 
Mos Eisley Cantina has beige and gray fur. 


Greedo 

Àn ambitious but naive 
Rodian bounty hunter, Greedo 
has his sights on bringing in 
Han Solo. Greedo recently 
joined Jabba the Hutt's organi- 
zation, but many of Mos 
Eisley's seasoned observers 
believe that his ego far out- 
strips his abilities; the young hunter may not be around 
long enough to collect that precious bounty. 


Painting Tips. Green skin, deep purple eyes, brown 
vest. Shirt and pants are green with yellow piping. 
Boots are green. 


Greedo. Dexterity 4D, blaster 6D, dodge 5D, grenade 
6D, Knowledge 2D+2, intimidation 5D, languages 3D, 
streetwise 4D+2, Mechanical 2D+2, space transports 
4D+2, starship gunnery 4D+2, Perception 3D, bargain 4D, 
investigation 4D, search 5D, Strength 3D+2, brawling 
4D+2, Technical 2D, demolition 4D, space transports 
repair 3D. Character Points: 2, Move: 10. Equipment: 
Blaster pistol (4D), grenades (5D). 


Other Personas. The Greedo figure can represent 
any Rodian. You may change the shade of green for 
skin color and paint clothing as desired. 


Jawas 

Jawas are intelligent, rodent- 
like scavengers native to 
Tatooine. They are obsessed 
with collecting outmoded and 
abandoned hardware and sell- 
ing the refurbished goods to 
moisture farmers and other 
locals. Roughly one meter tall, 
Jawas wear coarse, homespun cloaks and hoods to 
shield them from the hostile rays of Tatooine’s twin 
suns. 


Painting Tips. Most Jawas have a simple brown 
cloak. Gloves and ionization blasters are black, while 
the ammo bandoliers may be black or tan. The “face” 
area should be painted black, with the exception of 
two brilliant orange eyes. 


Typical Jawa. Dexterity 2D, blaster 2D+2, dodge 3D, 


ЕЗ Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


Knowledge 2D, streetwise 4D, survival: desert 4D+2, 
value 3D+1, Mechanical 3D, ground vehicle operation: 
sandcrawler 3D+1, Perception ID, bargain 4D, con 3D+1, 
Strength 1D, climbing/jumping2D+2, Technical 3D, com- 
puter programming/repair 4D, repulsorlift repair 4D+2. 
Move: 8. Equipment: Jawa ionization gun (+1Dto blaster, 
3D ionization damage which affects droids only), tool 
kit, brown robes. 


Other Personas. One Jawa looks much like any 
other, so individual variations are minimal. 


Het Nkik. Het appears to be an ordinary Jawa, but he 
believes in fighting those who would hurt his people, 
namely the Empire and Tatooine's dangerous Tusken 
Raiders. 


Wrex. A Jawa "mercenary" working for Big Bunji. 
Wrex wears dark blue robes with gray highlighting. 


Imperial Sandtroopers 

Imperial stormtroopers 
trained for desert survival, 
sandtroopers are equipped 
with special equipment to en- 
able them to operate in this 
harsh environment. Sand- 
troopers often prefer to use 
local beasts of burden instead 
of repulsorlift vehicles, which are often damaged by 
the harsh desert sands. 


Painting Tips. Standard white uniform, with black 
body glove visible between armor plates. Shoulder 
pauldrons may be black, white or orange. Backpacks 
should be black. 


Typical Sandtrooper. All stats 2D except: blaster 
4D, brawling parry 4D, dodge 4D, vehicle blasters 4D, 
survival 4D, beast riding 4D«1, search 3D«2, brawling 
3D. Move: 10. Equipment: Heavy blast armor (+10 to 
Strength to resist damage, -1D to Dexterity and all 
related actions), blaster pistol (4D), heavy blaster rifle 
(6D), long-range comlink, food/water pack 


Other Personas. This figure could be painted with 
various colors to represent a rouge bounty hunter 
with stolen stormtrooper armor. 


Labria 

LabriaisaDevaronian who's 
one of Mos Eisley's biggest 
drunks ... and one of its big- 
gestsquealers. While he's quite 
cunning, there's no such thing 
as secrecy to him; he's willing 
to sell information to anyone 
who has credits. He is known 
as Jabba the Hutt's "least favorite spy" and often 
trades information with "Long Snoot" (Garindan) and 
other spies. 


Painting Tips. Labria has light red-brown skin and 
brown horns. He wears red robes. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


Ини л 


Labria. Dexterity 2D, dodge 3D, Knowledge 3D, 
streetwise 4D, Mechanical 1D, astrogation 3D+1, Percep- 
tion 2D+2, con 3D+2, hide 3D, investigation 4D+1, sneak 
3D+2, Strength 2D+1, Technical 1D, computer program- 
ming/repair 3D. Character Points: 3. Move: 10. Eguip- 
ment: Half-empty bottle of Jawa beer. 


Other Personas. Devaronians are fairly common 
aliens. Any other Devaronian character can be repre- 
sented by simply changing the color of the clothing or 
altering skin tone. 


Oxbel. This Devaronian, also a freguent customerin 
the Mos Eisley Cantina, claims to be Labria's brother. 
In truth, thetwoareno relation but they haveusedthis 
scam for their own mutual benefit. Oxbel has very light 
brown skin and dresses in rustic, tan robes. 


Garindan (Long Snoot) 

Garindan is the premiere 
spy of Mos Eisley. It is often 
said that his “Long Snoot” sniffs 
out his targets for him. He 
works for the Imperial Prefect, 
a position currently held by 
Orun Depp. (It should be noted 
that Depp dies in the adven- 
ture Tatooine Manhunt, by the time of Galaxy Guide 7: 
Mos Eisley, Mos Eisley's new ruler is Prefect Talmont.) 

Jabba finds Garindan to be a particularly bother- 
some thorn in his side and he must spend a great deal 
of effort distracting the spy so that he can complete his 
business without Imperial interference. Not many 
people in Mos Eisley know this, but Garindan is a 
member of the Kubaz species. 


Painting Tips. Garindan keeps himself well hidden 
under his black robes and gloves. He wears a gray shirt 
and gray pants. His snout is dark gray. He wears black 
goggles. 

Garindan. Dexterity 2D+2, blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D+2, 
Knowledge 3D, alien species 4D, languages 4D, streetwise 
4D+2, Mechanical 2D+2, Perception 4D, con 5D, hide 6D, 
investigation 6D+1, search: tracking 5D, sneak 7D, 
Strength 2D+2, Technical 3D, computer programming/ 
repair 3D+2, security 4D, Character Points: 3. Move: 9. 
Equipment: Comlink, blaster pistol (4D), hold-out 
blaster pistol (3D+1), 250 credits (for bribes). 


Other Personas. This figure could be used for any 
other Kubaz or a character wearing some sort of 
bizarre armor. 


Lak Sivrak 

This Shistavanen Wolfman 
is arecent arrival in Mos Eisley 
and not much is known about 
him. The notched blaster rifle 
he carries suggests he is a be- 
ing not to be trifled with. He 
spends much of his time in the 
Cantina, but often keeps to him- 
self; he has struck up a sort of friendship with the 


3 — 


(Ж) Introduction 


Ithorian named Momaw Nadon. Unknown to most, 
Sivrak is a former scout who's now a Rebel spy; he, 
Nadon and Unut Poll (owner of Spaceport Speeders) 
work together to secretly advance the interests of the 
Rebel Alliance. 


Painting Tips. Lak Sivrak has brown fur and black eyes. 
He wears a white shirt, brown pants and a worn red tunic. 


Lak Sivrak. Dexterity 2D+2, blaster 5D«2, dodge 
4D+2, Knowledge 4D, alien species 6D, planetary sys- 
tems 6D, survival 6D, Mechanical 3D, astrogation 5D, 
space transports 4D, starfighter piloting 4D, starship 
gunnery 5D+2, starship shields 4D«1, Perception 2D, 
hide 4D, search 5D, search: tracking 7D, sneak 4D, 
Strength 3D, climbing/jumping 4D, stamina 4D+1, Tech- 
nical 3D- 1, first aid 4D« 1, space transports repair 4D- 1, 
starfighterrepair4D+1. Force Points: 3. Character Points: 
9. Move: 11. Eguipment: Blaster pistol (4D), blaster 
rifle (5D), vibroblade (STR+2D), survival gear. 


Other Personas: Shistavanen Wolfmen are known 
for their scouting and piloting prowess, and may be 
encountered in many locations. Their fur tends to- 
ward black and brown, although other color variations 
— brownish-red, tan, gray or white — are possible. 
Many Shistavanen have black eyes, but others have 
red or gold eyes. 


Tar and Kal Lup. This Shistavanen 
couple own Lup's General Store, 
which is in the same square as the 

Cantina. They both 
wear gray and yel- 
low clothing. 


Momaw Nadon 

Momaw Nadonis a peaceful 
Ithorian (or "Hammerhead") 
whonow lives quietly in a small 
house on the outskirts of the 
city. His house contains an im- 
pressive greenhouse, with a 
multitude of plants from many 
worlds, including his 
homeworld of Ithor. Nadon is secretly a Rebel opera- 
tive. 


Painting Tips. Momaw Nadon has brown skin and 
wears shabby red clothing. His powerstaff is brown 
with silver trim. 


Momaw Nadon. Dexterity 3D, dodge 4D, melee com- 
bat: powerstaff 4D, Knowledge 3D+2, agriculture 5D, 
bureaucracy: Tafanda Bay 7D, cultures 4D+2, ecology 
6D, survival: jungle 5D, Mechanical 2D+1, repulsorlift 
operation 4D+ 1, Perception 3D+ 1, bargain 4D 1, Strength 
3D, lifting 4D, Technical 2D+2, first aid 4D«2. Force 
Points: 1, Character Points: 7, Move: 9. Agri-kit («1D to 
survival), powerstaff (STR+2D). 


Other Personas. Ithorians are a peaceful and gentle 
people known across the galaxy for their specially 
engineered plants. They are wandering traders and 
encountered on many worlds. Ithorians tend to dress 
in browns and greens, but some have a romantic flair, 
preferring flashier colors. 


Kabe 

Kabe is a young Chadra-Fan 
and she's become an excellent 
pick-pocket and petty thief 
through years of living on Mos 
Eisley's streets. Her guardian 
and protector is Muftak. 


Painting Tips. Kabe has 
brown fur with a gray snout 
and ears. Her robes are red and she wears a white vest. 


Kabe. Dexterity 3D«2, dodge 5D+2, pick pocket 6D, 
Knowledge 2D+2, streetwise 4D+2, value 3D+2, Mechani- 
cal 3D, repulsorlift operation 4D, Perception 3D«2, con 
4D, gambling 4D+ 1, hide 5D, sneak 5D+2, Strength 2D+ 1, 
Technical 2D+2, security 4D«2. Move: 6. Security sys- 
tems tool kit (+10 to security), knife (STR+1). 


Other Personas. Kabe can represent any Chadra- 
Fan. These playful aliens are known for their curiosity 
and their tendency to pull apart machinery (putting 
the item back together is someone else's problem). 


Muftak 
Muftakis a hulking Talz who 
knows little about his people 
or his homeworld; for as long 
as he can remember, he has 
been an orphan living in 
the alleys of Mos 
Eisley. He tries to 
keep Kabe under 
control, but his young friend 


d 


seems to constantly drag him into trouble. Muftak is 
also friends with Momaw Nadon. 


Painting Tips. Muftak's fur is gray. His eyes are 
black and the exposed skin on his hands and feet is 
brown. 


Muftak. Dexterity 2D+2, brawling parry 3D+2, Knowl- 
edge 2D- 1, streetwise 4D+1, Mechanical 3D, beast riding 
4D, Perception 2D+1, Strength 4D- 1, brawling 6D, lifting 
5D+1, Technical 3D. Move: 9. Beat-up hold-out blaster 
(2D+1). 


Other Personas. Talz are seldom encountered off 
their home world; those who can be found in space- 
ports are often slaves. 


Feltipern Trevagg 

Feltipern is a very corrupt 
official who works for the Mos 
Eisley city government. He de- 
lights in overcharging or con- 
ning the city's poorer citizens 
so he can claim their houses 
and resell them for a substan- 
tial fee. He is a Gotal. 


Painting Tips. Feltipern wears a dull brown cloak. 
His skin is brown with gray highlights. 


Feltipern Trevagg. Dexterity 2D, dodge 
3D+1, Knowledge 2D, intimida- 
tion 4D, law enforcement: Mos 
Eisley 6D, streetwise 4D+2, Me- 
chanical 1D, Perception 2D+2, 
bargain 5D, con 4D+2, forg- 
ery 4D+2, investigation 


Christopher Trevas 


lā 


(ж 


N 
> 


4D+2, search 4D+2, sneak 4D+ 1, Strength 2D+2, Techni- 
cal 1D+2, computer programming/repair 3D. Energy 
sensitivity (+3Dtosearchin open areas; +1Dincrowded 
areas, but -1D in areas of intense radiation), mood 
detection (may get bonus or penalty with Perception 
skills due to ability to detect intentions of others), fast 
initiative (+1D to initiative roll against non-Gotals). 
Move: 10. Datapad, comlink, hold-out blaster (3D+1). 
(See Galaxy Guide 4: Alien Races, pages 46—48.) 


Other Personas. This figure can be used for any 
Gotal in Mos Eisley. Gotals can be independent spac- 
ers or hired muscle, but they are well suited to be 
traders and con artists. 


The Counters 


Pages 30 and 32 of this booklet contain counters 
which may be photocopied, mounted on sturdy card- 
board, colored and used in conjunction with the min- 
iatures. While counters serve as an inexpensive way to 
fill out your miniatures armies, you should glue them 
to a washer or other weight to keep them stable during 
play. 


A Line in the Sand 


The counters for the scenario “A Line in the Sand” 
(on page 30) are as follows. Making three photocopies 
should provide plenty of soldiers if used with the 
miniatures and the counters on page 32. 


Sandtroopers (10). There are three squads of 
sandtroopers in this battle. 


Militia Members (3). Typical Mos Eisley Militia 
members, these troops wear tan clothing. The Mos 
Eisley symbol (on the chest) is light blue. Boots and 
blaster are black. 


Women Militia Members (3). These counters repre- 
sents ordinary citizens who have taken up arms to 
oust Prefect Talmont. Clothing may be of any color. 


Militia Members with Vibro-Axes (3). These Mos 
Eisley Militia members also wear tan clothing with a 
light blue Mos Eisley symbol on the chest. The vibro- 
ax has a black handle with a silver or gray blade. 


Swoop Gang Leader. This counter can be used for 
Swang, leader of the swoopers. Swang wears a red 
tunic and black pants. During the battle, any swooper 
gangers who abandon their vehicles can also be repre- 
sented by this counter, or alternately, players could 
use a number of counters on page 32 to represent 
swoop gangers. 


Prefect Talmont. Imperial Prefect Talmont dresses 
in solid black. 


Diew Rejeff. This wealthy merchant dresses in tans 
and browns. 


Swoops (3). The swoops should be gray and black, 
although swoop members may paint the cowlings and 
bodywork with any colors. They may also adorn their 


Introduction 


swoops with personalized images, such as twin suns, 
krayt dragons or other symbols. 


Counter Sheet 


The counters on page 32 can be used in any number 
of adventures. They are as follows. 


Top Row 


Ponda Baba. Ponda Babais a typical Aqualish thug. 
Pondais currently working with Dr. Evazan and enjoys 
tormenting those who appear to be weaker than him. 

Aqualish have green-brown skin. Ponda Baba wears 
an orange jacket, a blue shirt and pants, and black 
boots. 


Dr. Evazan. A self-proclaimed “surgeon,” Dr. Evazan 
is an insane butcher who's killed nearly two dozen 
patients in his gruesome experiments. He's wanted in 
more than 30 systems; a dozen have standing execu- 
tion orders. Evazan, who also goes by the aliases Dr. 
Cornelius and Roofoo, is hiding out since there’s a 
bounty on his head worth one million credits. 

This counter can be used for any thug. Dr. Evazan 
has white skin and brown hair. He wears a white shirt, 
with brown vest and pants. 


Myo the Abyssin. This violent Abyssin thug is known 
to frequent the Cantina. Myo is a mercenary with 
experience in desert survival; he'll hire himself out as 
a desert guide, although he's not to be trusted. 

Myo has brown skin, with white fur. He has a single 
large, white eye with a black slit pupil. His shirt and 
pants are tan. 

This counter can be used for any Abyssin. 


Snaggletooth. "Snaggletooth" is a superb bounty 
hunter who specializes in capturing Thalassian slavers. 
He is a member of the Snivvian species. He has light 
brown-gray skin and black eyes, with brown and gray 
hair. He wears a red jumpsuit with dark blue trim. 

Snivvians are a compulsive bunch, given to throw- 
ing themselves wholly into their tasks to better savor 
the experience. While most Snivvians are gentle and 
kind-hearted, those in violent professions — such as 
bounty hunters and smugglers — are quite dangerous. 


Zogrov. A Snivvian dock worker, Zogrov wears dark 
green outfits with white highlights. 


Takeel. This burnt-out Snivvian mercenary is often 
found in the Cantina looking for work. His mangy 
appearance hints at his down-trodden condition. He 
wears a ragged red shirt with black pants and boots. 


Bom Vimdin. A dour and cynical mercenary, Bom 
Vimdin is a member of an alien species known as the 
Advozsec (singular: Advozse). Vimdin is a smuggler 
with few scruples, caring little about the motives of 
those who hire him or what his cargo may be. He has 
extraordinary contacts in the galactic underworld; his 
presence in the Mos Eisley Cantina indicates he may 
now be working for Jabba the Hutt. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


Introduction (91 


Vimdin has tan skin and black eyes. His horn is 
brown. His shirt is black with white sleeves; his vest is 
brown with silver buttons. He wears brown gloves and 
red-brown pants. 

This counter can represent any Advozse. These 
aliens are known for their piloting skills and cynical 
natures. Several Advoszec smugglers frequently dock 
in Mos Eisley. 


Kollan Xa. This operative represents the little-known 
Ccalras Corporation and spends much of his time 
seeking out influential individuals who might help him 
with trade negotiations. Xa favors bright red clothing. 


Duro. Duros are aliens known for their piloting and 
mechanical skills. They can be encountered on almost 
any civilized world. Some of the characters the Duro 
counter can be used for include: 


Baniss Keeg. Keeg hires himself out as a flight in- 
structor. Considering the lucrative profits to be made 
in Jabba's smuggling syndicate, many of Tatooine's 
farm-boys seek out Keeg's expertise — although Keeg 
insists on full payment in advance since many of the 
new pilots fall victim to Imperial patrols and the ire of 
JabbatheHutt. Baniss Keeg has blue-gray skin and red 
eyes. He wears brown coveralls. 


Kov Du Рета. Kov is a fierce bodyguard and has the 
scars to prove it. He works for Kollan Xa. He wears 
white overalls with black boots and highlights. 


Chachi and Ohwun De Maal. This Duros couple own 
and operate Docking Bays 27, 43, 67, 71, 86 and 94. 
Chachi and her husband are forced to pay protection 
money to Jabba the Hutt. They wear matching green 
and blue workers' suits. 


Mos Eisley Militia, Mos Eisley Militia with Vibro- 
ax. See the description for these counters under *A 
Line in the Sand." 


Mace Windu. Mace Windu is a hyperactive Squib 
who is co-owner of Jawa Traders, a droid lot in down- 
town Mos Eisley. He has gray fur. This counter can be 
used to represent any Squib. 


Beeyon Nace. Beeyon Nace is a Spaceport Control 
worker who spends most of his free time in the Mos 
Eisley Cantina. He wears a black cloak with a gray shirt 
and brown pants. 


Jawa. A typical Jawa, with brown robes and orange 
eyes. 

Tusken Raider. A typical Tusken Raider figure. 

Whiphid. Whiphids are massive aliens known for 


their short tempers. They greatly prize the art of 
hunting. Whiphids have yellow-white or golden fur. 


Arcona. Arcona generally have gray to mahogany 
colored skin. Arcona have glittering, sparkling green 
eyes; those with gold eyes are addicted to salt. 

Mos Eisley has at least two well-known Arcona: 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


Unut Poll owns Spaceport Speeders, while Hem Dazon 
is a salt-addicted scout who's been spotted in the 
Cantina. 


Dottom Row 


Arakyd BT-16 Security Droid. The BT-16 security 
droid has six legs (for greater mobility) and a powerful 
repeating blaster. The droid is black with silver trim. 


Landspeeder. A typical landspeeder. It may be 
almost any color. 


Swoop. See the description for this counters under 
“A Line in the Sand." 


Gotal. Gotals tend to have gray and brown skin. 


Gran Thug. Gran have pale skin with black eyes. 
Those Gran working as thugs tend to dress in black 
and other dark colors. 


Rodian Thug. Rodians are found throughout Mos 
Eisley; many of them are on Jabba the Hutt's payroll. 
They have green skin and black eyes. 


Kayven Whistler. Jabba the Hutt keeps several of 
these creatures as pets in his townhouse. They are 
quite useful for disposing of meddlesome competi- 
tors. They are black and brown with green eyes. 


Twi'lek Woman. In the adventure "Vested Inter- 
est," a Twi'lek woman poses as a slave to lure Beeyon 
Nace into working for Jabba the Hutt. Twi'leks may 
have pale brown, pink or green skin. 


Assembling Your Counters 


To assemble your counters, cut along the 
solid lines and fold along the dotted lines (see 
Figure 1 below). To make the stand, interlock the 
tabs on their bases (see Figure 2). 


Vested Interest 


Vested Interest 


Zogrov, aSnivvian dock worker and an associate of 
the characters, approaches them with a request for 
help. His friend, Beeyon Nace, has been particularly 
sour of mood. Zogrov found out that Nace is being 
forced to spy for Ccalras Corporation, acompany with 
a reputation for violence and ruthlessness. 


Zogrov. All stats 2D except: blaster 4D+ 1, dodge 5D, 
Knowledge 3D+1, language 4D, business 3D, streetwise 
4D, Mechanical 2D+1, repulsorlift operation 4D, space 
transports 3D, starship gunnery 3D, Perception 4D, bar- 
gain 6D, investigation 6D, search 6D, Strength 3D, brawl- 
ing 3D, Technical 3D, first aid 4D. Special Abilities: 
adaptive skin (Snivvians can survive in temperature 
extremes of minus 30 degrees standard, to tempera- 
tures up to 45 degrees standard without protective 
gear, +1D against physical damage). Character Points: 
4. Move: 11. Equipment: Comlink, blaster pistol (4D), 
250 credits. 


Knowing that his friend is scheduled to meet with 
Ccalras this coming evening — it's now midafternoon 
— Zogrov begs the characters to investigate the situ- 
ation and see if they can help Nace. Perhaps they can 
find what Ccalras is holding over him and somehow 
stophim fromsigning with the company. Zogrov knows 
only that Ccalras's representative is Kollan Xa. 


It's for Your Own Good 

Zogrov suggests to the characters that they should 
"kidnap" Nace to protect him from Ccalras. He's cur- 
rently on duty at the Mos Eisley Spaceport Control 
Tower (see page 64 of Galaxy Guide 7) — it would be 
tricky to kidnap him with so many starport security 
officers in the building — but the characters could also 
confront him after work. He normally heads straight 
for the Cantina after finishing a work shift. When the 
characters have Nace, they are to go to the Cantina to 
get Zogrov. 


Beeyon Nace. All stats 2D except: Dexterity 3D+1, 
blaster 4D«2, dodge 3D«2, Knowledge 3D, bureaucracy 
5D+2, languages 4D, streetwise 3D+2, Mechanical 3D, 
astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation 3D, Perception 3D+ 1, 
bargain 3D, gambling 4D» 1, Technical 3D, computer pro- 
gramming/repair 5D. Character Points: 4. Move: 10. 


StarportSecurity Officers. All stats 2D except: blaster 
3D, brawling parry 3D, dodge 4D, vehicle blasters 4D, 
intimidation 3D, survival 3D, beast riding 3D«1, com- 
mand 3D, search 3D«2, brawling 3D. Move: 10. Equip- 
ment: Blast vest («1D physical, «1 energy), blaster 
pistol (4D), comlink, IDs. 


When the characters confront Nace though, he is 
anything but helpful. He screams for help and tries to 
get away from them. Once they calm him down, he 
becomes sullen and refuses to talk, saying only, "There's 
no way out of this mess. I’m going to do what I have to 
do!" 

Searching Nace's person reveals a datachip; if the 
characters don't search him, it slides out of his pocket 
infront ofthem. When thechip is read in a datapad, the 
characters find the name Kollan Xa, with a notethat he 
has a room at the Lucky Despot Hotel. There is a 
prerecorded message which shows a dangerous-look- 
ing Advoszec; Nace admits the this is Kollan Xa. In the 
message, the alien says, "Nace, you be at the Lucky 
Despot's lounge by nightfall or else. No tricks, no 
trouble, and she lives. If you try to double-cross me, I'll 
let them sell her to the slavers." 


Zogrov's Aid 


When the characters contact Zogrov after captur- 
ing Nace, the Snivvian offers to hold Nace in his small 
apartment, which is two blocks from the Mos Eisley 
Cantina. Nace calms down slightly when Zogrov ar- 
rives and appears to be somewhat cooperative. Zogrov 
sends the characters to the Lucky Despot with orders 
to spy on Kollan Xa. 


The Lucky Despot Hotel 

At the Lucky Despot, the characters spot the 
Advozsec talking to a Duro. They overhear that the 
Duro’s name is Kov Du Derra. Xa tells him, “Go to the 
guest house and make sure Nace's lady love is comfort- 
able. We need to keep her under wraps until our 
business is done.” 


Kollan Xa. All stats 2D except: dodge 5D, melee 
combat 3D+2, melee parry 3D+1, Knowledge 3D, alien 
species 4D, bureaucracy 4D, law enforcement 4D, 
streetwise 5D, value 4D, Mechanical 3D, repulsorlift 
operation 4D, Perception 3D+2, bargain 7D, con 5D+2, 
gambling 4D+1, hide 4D, investigation 5D+2, Strength 
3D, brawling 3D+1, Technical 2D+2, computer program- 
ming/repair 3D, demolitions 3D+1, repulsorlift repair 
3D+2, security 3D+1. Character Points: 2. Move: 9. 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D+2), 500 credits, 
comlink. 


Kov Du Derra. Dexterity 4D, blaster 6D, dodge 5D, 
Knowledge 2D+2, intimidation 5D, languages 3D, 
streetwise 4D+2, Mechanical 3D+1, space transports 


SS SSS SS SS = 


tar Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


4D+2, starship gunnery 4D+2, Perception 3D, command 
4D, investigation 4D, search 5D, Strength 3D, brawling 
4D+2, Technical 2D, demolition 4D, space transports 
repair 3D. Character Points: 3. Move: 10. Eguipment: 
Blaster pistol (4D), comlink. 


Following the Duro 

Thecharacters guickly discover that following Kov 
Du Derra through the crowded and twisted streets of 
Mos Eisley is anything but easy. During their journey, 
the characters are spotted by some thugs they an- 
noyed during an earlier misadventure. The thugs — 
one for every character — pursue the characters and 
attack; Du Derra slips away. 


Thugs. All stats 2D except: blaster 3D, dodge 2D- 1, 
melee combat 2D- 1, melee parry 2D- 1, streetwise 3D+2, 
brawling 4D. Move: 10. Equipment: Comlink, vibroblade 
(STR+1D), blaster pistol (4D). 


Staging Tips. This chase and battle — and the 
continuing pursuit of Du Derra — can involve a num- 
ber of incidental encounters. For example, the charac- 
ters may stumble upon a droid who's looking for its 
master (perhaps one of the characters bears a passing 
resemblance to this person), a pick-pocket who tries 
to rip off one of the characters, or a traffic jam caused 
by a minor landspeeder accident. 

During the chase, a pair of Jawas on a ronto cross 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


ен 


betweenthetwo groups, givingthecharactersachance 
to get away from the thugs. 


Ronto. Dexterity 2D, running 3D, Perception 3D, Strength 
5D, stamina 6D. Specialabilities: Heat endurance (rontos 
are extremely adaptable to desert conditions), sense of 
smell (rontos have keen senses of smell and get «1D to 
any Perception roll involving smell), skittish (rontos are 
easily upset by any machines that move quickly; add 
+3D to their orneriness when around fast-moving ve- 
hicles). Move: 10. Orneriness: 1D 


During the battle, several of Mos Eisley's militia 
soldiers arrive. Assistant Security Officer Predne Balu 
questions the characters whiletheother militiatroops 
round up the thugs. If the characters claim that they're 
just victims, Balu lets them go: witnesses already 
reported that the characters were attacked without 
provocation. 


Mos Eisley Militia Officer. All stats are 2D except: 
blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D, melee combat 3D+1, law en- 
forcement 3D+2, streetwise 3D, con 2D+2, command 2D, 
brawling 3D. Move: 10. Blaster pistol (4D, normally set 
on stun), comlink, three sets of binders, stun baton 
(Moderate difficulty, STR+1D stun), blast vest («1D 
physical, «1 energy). 


Staging Tips. A positive encounter with Balu and 
the militia troops gives the characters a chance to 


= ss С. Ене 


у 


(ж) 


a 


establish a contact that leads into the adventure “Har- 
vest Day.” 


Picking Up the Trail 

After the characters evade their pursuers, a Dim-U 
priest approaches the characters and asks them if 
they were “following someone.” He knows they were, 
and for a small donation of 10 credits to the “Adopt A 
Bantha Foundation,” he will gladly point them in the 
right direction! 

After adopting a bantha (they get holos and monthly 
updates), the Dim-U priest gladly points them in the 
right direction. They quickly pick up the trail of the Duro. 


A Helpless Captive 

They follow the Duro to a house on the edge of the 
city. He goes in for a few minutes, then leaves, heading 
back into the center of the city. 

If the characters observe the house’s occupants, 
they see a slim and very attractive Twi'lek woman and 
a hovering security droid (as well as Du Derra if he’s 
still there). 

If the characters enter the house, the droid tries to 
stop them, while the woman ducks for cover. 


Security Droid. All stats are 2D except: blaster 4D, 
dodge 4D, Strength 3D. Armor plate (+1D), blaster pistol 
(4D). Move: 12. 


The woman acts very sweet and innocent, but vol- 
unteers as little information as possible. Eventually 
she offers that her name is Eila. If the characters 
mention Nace, she claims that she’s Nace’s sweet- 
heart. She says that she’s going to be sold into slavery 
and Nace is joining Ccalras to try to save her. She begs 
the characters to help her! 


Eila. All stats 2D except: streetwise 5D, bargain 4D+2, 
con 6D, search 4D+2, sneak 5D+1. Move: 10. Hold-out 
blaster (hidden, 3D+2). 


Staging Tips. Play Eila as charming and seemingly 
naive, but she’s not that good an actress. At times, her 
true personality — snide, manipulative and cruel — 
slips through, although she normally catches herself 
and corrects her behavior. 


The Reunion 

Returning with Eila brings Nace out of his depres- 
sion. Nace seems quite content. 

Zogrov thinks he can help — he digs out a pair of 
Dim-U priest robes, and explains that he’s on good 
terms with Abbot Drayk, who runs the Dim-U Monas- 
tery. He says that he can arrange for the couple to be 


Vested Interest 


hidden at the Monastery. He hurries the group along, 
asking the characters to scout ahead and make sure 
the path is clear for Nace and Eila. 

As the characters sneak through the city, Zogrov 
keeps contact with his comlink. Eventually, the comlink 
broadcasts the sounds of a scuffle and a couple of 
blaster shots. When the characters make their way 
back to Zogrov, they find Eila is holding a hold-out 
blaster on both Nace and Zogrov. Kollan Xa, Du Derra 
and several Klatooinan thugs have joined the woman. 

Just as the characters come upon the scene, Eila 
says that she wants double the money she was prom- 
ised for this con. Now that Nace realizes that he’s been 
made out to be a fool, he turns into a blithering idiot, 
continually muttering about how unfair his life is. 


Kollan Xa’s Thugs. All stats 2D except: blaster 2D+1, 
brawling parry 3D+2, dodge 2D+2, melee combat 3D, 
melee parry 2D+2, intimidation 3D+2, streetwise 3D+2, 
brawling 4D, lifting 3D, stamina 2D+2. Move: 10. Equip- 
ment: Comlink, vibroblade (STR+1D), blast vest (+1D 
physical, +1 energy), blaster pistol (4D). 


If the characters act quickly, they should be able to 
duck out of sight before Xa and his thugs spot them. If 
they linger, Xa orders his men to attack while he, Eila 
and Du Derra try to drag Nace and Zogrov away. 

This scene can lead to an exciting chase, but the 
characters should eventually come up with a plan to 
drive off Kollan Xa and rescue Nace and Zogrov. When 
the dust settles, Zogrov insists that they all head to the 
Dim-U Monastery for shelter. Upon arrival there, Zogrov 
and Abbot Drayk greet each other as old friends. Nace 
explains to Drayk that Ccalras Corporation is black- 
mailing him: Xa and Eila used the ruse of a romance. 
Nace knows Xa will now just threaten him unless he 
cooperates: Ccalras wants him to report on security 
and customs patrols. 

Drayk smiles, explaining that Ccalras is a front 
company for Jabba the Hutt. Because of several recent 
incidents, particularly that one with Solo, Mos Eisley 
Customs has been much more strict in inspections. 
Jabba is looking for ways to get his cargoes in and out 
of Mos Eisley without any hassle. 

Jabba can be quite persistent, but Drayk can offer 
some sort of protection: the Dim-U Monastery hides a 
computer slicing and forging operation. If Nace is 
willing to provide the occasional false transponder 
code, Drayk promises that he can use his contacts in 
the city to keep Jabba’s minions quite distracted ... 
distracted enough that they'll forget all about Nace! 


e Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


There's Many a Slip Detwixt Cup ond Lip 


wa 


There's Many a 
Slip Betwixt Cup 
and Lip 


The characters are contacted by Labria, who has a 
valuable cargo he's willing to part with. If they bring 
plenty of credits to the Mos Eisley Cantina, perhaps a 
deal can be arranged. 

Upon meeting Labria at the Cantina, he explains 
thatheknows howto get a cargo of espionage matrixes 
for use in protocol and servant droids. These valuable 
droid parts could be very helpful to any number of 
beings, including Jabba the Hutt or perhaps the Rebel- 
lion. Labria wants 10,000 credits for the cargo of 50 
matrixes; any character making a Moderate value or 
Difficult streetwise or droid programming roll realizes 
the cargo is worth 50,000 credits on the black market. 

With prodding, Labria reveals that this cargo be- 
longed to a careless spacer who was arrested by Mos 
Eisley Customs for smuggling. The spacer is now sit- 
ting in the Mos Eisley Police Station. The police don't 
have enough officers to guard the cargo, so it's still in 
a docking bay behind locked doors, undelivered and 
unclaimed. If the cargo is "taken care of" before the 
smuggler is released, there are plenty of profits to be 
made. 

While Labria is wrapping up his explanation, he is 
interrupted by a menacing-looking Rodian, who is 
accompanied by a Jawa in blue robes and a young 
Chadra-Fan. The Rodian snarls at Labria, pulling him 
away from the table. The Rodian tersely tells the 
characters (in Basic) that Labria has a very important 
meeting now. 

The trio forces Labria out the back door. If the 
characters try to protect Labria, the Jawa and the 
Chadra-Fan distract them by kicking them in the shins 
and trying to scuttle away and hide in the crowd. 
Meanwhile, the Rodian continues to drag Labria, who 
is screaming for help. No one in the Cantina acts to 
protect the Devaronian. 

Rait the Chadra-Fan. All stats 2D except: blaster 
2D+1, dodge 3D, pick pocket 4D, languages 3D+2, 
streetwise 3D, con 3D+1, search 3D+2, Strength 1D+2, 
climbing/jumping 3D. Move: 8. Equipment: Stun pistol 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


(4D stun), 5 credits, miscellaneous useless trinkets. 


Rait is a nervous, chittering Chadra-Fan. He acts as 
aspy and look-out for Voushon. While nervous around 
strangers, once he gets used to someone he becomes 
quite curious, incessantly poking and prodding his 
new friends. While he doesn't speak Basic, Rait under- 
stands the language. 


Wrex the Jawa. All stats 2D except: blaster 2D+2, 
dodge 3D, streetwise 4D, survival: desert 4D+2, value 
3D+1, Mechanical 3D, ground vehicle operation: 
sandcrawler 3D+ 1, Perception ID, bargain 4D, con 3D- 1, 
Strength 1D, climbing/jumping 2D+2, Technical 3D, com- 
puter programming/repair 4D, repulsorlift repair 4D+2. 
Move:8. Equipment: Jawa ionization gun (+1D to blaster 
skill, 3D ionization damage affects droids only), tool 
kit, worn blue robes, bandoleers with pouches. 


Wrex is a typical Jawa, although he prefers blue 
robes to the traditional brown. Wrex acts as a liaison 
between Big Bunji and the various Jawa tribes that 
trade in Mos Eisley. Wrex is also a good spy since few 
people bother to notice the tiny Jawa lurking in the 
background. 


Voushon the Rodian. Dexterity 4D, dodge 5D, melee 
combat 6D, melee parry 5D, Knowledge 2D, intimidation 
4D, survival: desert 5D, streetwise 4D, Mechanical 3D, 
beast riding 5D, Perception 3D, search 5D, Strength 4D, 
brawling 5D+ 1, climbing/jumping 5D, lifting 5D, stamina 
6D, Technical 1D+2, first aid 3D. Character Points: 5. 
Move 11. Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), vibroblade 
(STR+1D). 


Voushon has worked for Big Bunji for a couple of 
years and is now trying to mastermind a rescue mis- 
sion. He speaks Basic fluently, although his voice has 
a nasal, sgueaky tone. While Voushon tries to come 
across as a stereotypical heartless thug, he's actually 
a lot more moral than he lets on. Voushon likes smug- 
gling because no one gets hurt. The Rodian plays 
tough, but is extremely reluctant to use physical vio- 


————————————————— НЫЕ 


(Ж) There's Many a Slip Detwixt Cup and Lip 


lence — although he's enjoying terrifying Labria since 
the Devaronian spy has been a thorn in his side for a 
long time. 


When the characters catch up with the group, the 
Rodian and his two companions arethreatening Labria. 
Labria is trying to talk his way out of trouble: 


"It's not my fault. Big Bunji and I have done 
business for years. I wouldn't want to see him hauled 
off to an Imperial prison facility. I didn't do її... 
someone else must've tipped the Customs crews off. 
Maybe it was Garindan? I didn't do it — I swear!" 


If Labria sees the characters, he begs for help. He 
makes sure not to mention the droid matrixes. If the 
characters rescue Labria, he tells them that those 
"dangerous thugs" work for Big Bunji, the smuggler 
who got arrested for having the droid matrixes. He 
says they blame him for Bunji's arrest, but he had 
nothing to do with it; someone else must have told the 
Customs department about the droid matrixes! 

Labria then slyly explains that Bunji's impounded 
ship is in Docking Bay 86: if the characters hurry, they 
should be able to steal the cargo before Bunji's associ- 
ates get back to the bay. Cut to "Docking Bay 86." 

Ifthe characters mention the droid matrixes in front 
of Bunji’s associates, Voushon the Rodian gets quite 
angry but lets Labria go. He then recruits the charac- 
ters; cut to “The Deal.” 

Docking Bay 86 

If the characters try to break into Docking Bay 86, 
they must first make a Moderate security roll to get 
through the locked doors without setting off the alarm. 
Failing the roll by three or more points means the 
characters activate the alarm system: Mos Eisley Space- 
port Security guards arrive 10 minutes later to investi- 
gate. 

Inside the bay, the characters see a nondescript 
Corellian YT-1300 freighter. No one is inside the bay. 

The freighter also has a lock system — the charac- 
ters must make a Difficult security roll to pry open the 
locks. Failing the roll simply means that the ship 
remains locked; there is no alarm. 

Once aboard the ship, a thorough search reveals 
that there is no cargo aboard. While the characters are 
conducting their search, Voushon, Wrex, and Rait 
return to the docking bay. They soon confront the 
characters, but rather than fight, they offer to make a 
deal. When the characters ask about the cargo, 
Voushon laughs. “Labria’s sources were wrong again. 
But if we work together, we can all get rich...” 

Cut to “The Deal.” 


The Deal 
Voushon is trying to recruit the characters to help 
him. He explains the situation: 


“My boss is Big Bunji, one of the big smuggling 
brokers here in Mos Eisley. Although he’s quite 
wealthy, he still likes to roll up his sleeves and go out 
on a run now and again just to keep the reflexes 


sharp. This time, though, he got himself into a lot of 
trouble. 

“He was hauling a cargo of espionage droid ma- 
trixes. Big credits in the right place, and Mos Eisley’s 
the right place. It was too tempting for Bunji to pass 
up. 
“Too bad there are some jealous types around 
here. Someone told Customs what was going on and 
Bunji got himself arrested. 

“The Customs officials arrested him on minor stuff 
... paperwork out of order, that sort of thing ... 
because Bunji hid the cargo. Unfortunately, Bunji's 
been in trouble on a bunch of worlds and most of 
them want his skin. The Imperials are supposed to 
arrive soon and take him off-planet to stand trial. 

"Then there's the cargo. We don't know where it 
is, the Customs goons don't know where it is, Labria 
sure doesn't know where it is ... even the mighty 
Jabba would have a tough time tracking this cargo 
down. And it's worth a lot. 

*Here's the deal. You help us rescue Bunji, we'll 
give you 10 of those matrixes on the condition you 
sell them off world. They're worth 10,000 to the right 
people." 

Voushon isn't willing to budge: he's offering a for- 
tune. And, as he's quick to point out, how hard can it 
beto bust someone out of Mos Eisley's police station? 

Once the characters accept, Voushon sends the 
characters and Wrex on several errands, while he and 
Rait go to study the Mos Eisley Police Station. The 
characters must do the following: 


* Find out when the Imperial prison shuttle is arriving. 
If the characters have no idea where to begin, Voushon 
suggests they contact Abbot Drayk at the Dim-U Mon- 
astery or they should find someone at the Spaceport 
Control Tower. Cut to “The Prison Shuttle.” 


* Arrange for a get-away speeder. Wrex says he knows 
just the place. Cut to “A Not-So-Quick Get-Away.” 


* Find an escape ship. If the characters don't have any 
contacts in the smuggler community, Voushon sug- 
gests they seek out Bom Vimdin, an Advoszec smug- 
gler who frequents the Mos Eisley Cantina. Cut to 
“Transportation Off This Rock.” 


Spies in the Shadows 


While the characters are completing these errands, 
they have another encounter with Labria. They spot 
him while he’s obviously trailing them; if confronted, 
he sincerely apologizes for the earlier misunderstand- 
ing. He explains that he was working with incomplete 
information before, but he'd love to help the charac- 
ters earn a fortune. He proposes joining forces, offer- 
ing to split the take. He even says that he can get 
additional guards to overpower Bunji and his compan- 
ions, so he and the characters can have the whole 
cargo to themselves. 

However, this is all a ruse by Labria. He truly ex- 


| I Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


pects the characters to chase him away, but his main 
objective is to distract the characters for a few min- 
utes. Lurking in the background is Garindan ("Long 
Snoot"), who's trying to discover where the cargo is. 
Garindan has hired several people to “jostle” the char- 
acters as they walk by; one of these citizens has a 
micro-comlink, which is supposed to be inconspicu- 
ously slapped on a character's shirt. Garindan plans to 
listen in on the comlink and follow its homing beacon 
to learn the characters' plans. 

Thecitizen attaches the comlink; unless the charac- 
ter makes a point of thoroughly searching his person 
for the comlink, a Very Difficult hide roll is needed to 
spot the comlink, which is barely a centimeter across. 


The Prison Shuttle 


To learn when the prison shuttle is going to show 
up, the characters can go to Abbot Drayk at the Dim-U 
Monastery or Beeyon Nace at the Spaceport Control 
Tower. If things went well in "Vested Interest," both 
should be willing to help out for a modest fee. 

Wrex — via a droid on hand that interprets for him 
— promises 1,000 credits. Nace accepts this fee. Drayk 
demands no less than 5,000; Wrex eventually agrees. 

Nace simply has to look at the incoming ship sched- 
ule. In Drayk's case, once the characters have left, he 
calls Nace to get this information. In both cases, the 
characters areassured that they'll becalled via comlink 
once the information is found. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


There's Many a Slip Detwixt Cup and Lip (91 


A Not-So-Quick Get-Away 


For a get-away vehicle, Wrex drags the characters 
to Jawa Traders. He says that he's on good terms with 
Aguilae, the Jawa co-owner, and they should be able to 
get a great deal. 

Upon entering the droid lot, they are greeted by 
Mace Windu, a Sguib and the lot's other co-owner. 
Mace says that Aguilae isn't in today, but he promises 
to make a “good, good, best" deal. After Wrex jabbers 
for a few minutes, Mace admits that he does have a 
landspeeder out back, but it's “valuable much. Need 
plenty of good stuff to let it go." 

While the negotiations initially involve only Mace 
and Wrex, Mace quickly drags the characters into the 
middle of the deal by demanding some of their posses- 
sions. 


Staging Tip. This scene should be a humorous and 
incredibly intricate negotiation scene. As Mace makes 
the deal more complex, the characters should start to 
feel that "no reward is worth this." 


While Mace and Wrex prattle on, a trio of mean- 
looking “customers” come onto the lot. They interrupt 
Mace and soon begin bullying him; the characters 
overhear that they are actually some of Jabba’s thugs 
and they’re looking for the protection money they’re 
owed. While Mace tries to stand up to them, the thugs 
soon start knocking over the droids and threatening 
him. 


u ——‏ > ی 


Wrex tries to get out of the way, but trips over one 
of the thugs. In some way or another, the characters 
should become involved in this confrontation — if 
nothing else, the thugs start hassling them as well. 

The thugs flee once the characters stand up to 
them. In gratitude, Mace promises to loan Wrex and 
the characters the landspeeder out back, but they 
have to promise to bring it back in good shape. 

The landspeeder seats eight beings and appears to 
be in good shape; it has a brilliant blue paint scheme 
and silver trim. However, once the repulsorlift drive is 
started up, smoke begins belching from the back. 
(Mace assures the characters that there's nothing 
wrong. "The smoke will stop right away ... faster than 
that, even.") Eventually, the smoke stops, and while 
the speeder does run reliably, it's hard to get over the 
smell of burning circuitry that fills the passenger com- 
partment. 


Landspeeder. Speeder-scale, maneuverability 1D, 
move 115; 300 kmh, body strength 2D. 


Transportation Off This Rock 


The characters can find Bom Vimdin in the Cantina. 
At the gamemaster's discretion, the characters can 
also hire a smuggler they might have encountered in a 
previous adventure. 

Vimdin is a cold, calculating individual who works 
for anyone with the credits. He seems disinterested 
unless the characters explain that Big Bunji is in- 
volved, in which case Vimdin will takethe job for either 
10,000 credits or four future unspecified smuggling 
cargoes. Wrex quickly agrees. Vimdin says that his 
ship, the Blood Freeze, is in Docking Bay 65; he tells 
them that he'll be ready to go as soon as they show up. 


Bom Vimdin. Dexterity 2D+1, blaster 3D+1, dodge 
4D+1, melee combat 3D+2, melee parry 3D+1, pick 
pocket 4D, Knowledge 2D- 1, alien species 3D, bureau- 
cracy 3D+1, law enforcement 7D+1, streetwise 5D+1, 
value 4D, Mechanical 3D+2, astrogation 4D+2, repulsorlift 
operation 4D, space transports 4D, starship gunnery 5D, 
starship shields 3D+1, Perception 3D, bargain 7D, con 
7D+2, gambling3D+1, hide 4D, investigation 5D+2, search 
3D+1, sneak 3D+2, Strength 3D, brawling 3D+1, climb- 
ing/jumping 3D+2, Technical 2D+2, computer program- 
ming/repair 3D, demolition 3D+1, repulsorlift repair 
3D+2, security 8D+1, space transport repair 4D. Force 
Points: 1. Character Points: 9. Move: 9. Eguipment: 
blaster pistol (4D) 


Blood Freeze. Ghtroc freighter, starfighter-scale, 
hyperdrive multiplier x2, maneuverability 1D, space3, 
atmosphere 260; 750 kmh, hull 3D+2, shields 1D. Weap- 
ons: One double laser cannon (fire control 1D+2, dam- 
age 4D). 


Planning the Rescue 


The next morning, the characters are comlinked by 
Drayk or Nace and told that Bungi is beingtransported 


There's Many o Slip Detwixt Cup and Lip 


in a hover-truck to Docking Bay 94 at 1000 hours. With 
the route and time in hand, the characters can set up 
their ambush. 

Drayk also offers the characters Ccalras Corpora- 
tion IDs, which they are supposed to drop at the scene. 
This will implicate Ccalras in this incident and prevent 
the characters from being identified (as long as they 
get away, that is). Drayk slyly comments, "This will 
keep Jabba busy!" 

If they are under-powered, then Voushon suggests 
that the characters contact Kayson at his weapon 
shop; Kayson gives them a fair price if they mention 
they are helping Big Bungi. 

The Ambush 

This mission seems to be simple at first; the hover- 
truck appears to have no escort. However, things go 
horribly wrong once the rescue attempt begins: the 
hover-truck's doors open and 10 sandtroopers pour 
out of the vehicle, while two dozen security officers 
block the streets. The characters are informed that 
they're under arrest! (Needless to say, Garindan used 
his comlink or found other ways of spying on the 
characters, and reported their plans to Prefect 
Talmont.) 

Just as things are beginning to look desperate, 
dozens of droids wander into the area, blocking the 
line of fire for the security guards and creating a lot of 
confusion. This gives the characters the opportunity 
to escape; while fleeing, they see Mace Windu and 
Aguilae in the alleys, chuckling to themselves as they 
observe the confusion their droids have created. 
(Winduis returning the favor for his previous rescue!) 


One Last Chance 

The characters are comlinked again and told that 
the prison shuttle is actually landing in Docking Bay 87 
— and Bunji is already there! They have to hurry to 
rescue Bungi! 

At the Docking Bay, the characters face very little 
opposition: there are only half a dozen guards and 
another four stormtroopers protecting Bungi. 


Mos Fisley Security Officers. All stats 2D except: 
blaster 3D, brawling parry 3D, dodge 4D, vehicle blasters 
4D, intimidation 3D, survival 3D, beast riding 3D+1, 
command 3D, search 3D+2, brawling 3D. Move: 10. 
Equipment: Blast vest («1D physical, +1 energy), blaster 
pistol (4D), comlink, IDs 


If the characters act quickly, they rescue Bunji and 
escape into the crowded alleys; if the characters are 
too slow or leave a trail, they are pursued through the 
city and a wild chase begins. 


Getting the Cargo 


Oncefree ofthe pursuing guards, Voushon explains 
to Big Bunji that the characters orchestrated his res- 
cue — although they were working for Labria at first! 
Bunji sticks to the agreement Voushon made and 
offers to lead everyone to the cargo. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


There's Many a Slip Detwixt Cup a 


Bunji leads the characters to a small antigue shop, 
which has a hidden entrance to Mos Eisley's network 
of underground caverns. 


Staging Tip. Depending upon the pacing wanted for 
this adventure, you can make picking up the cargo a 
simple matter ... or make finding the cargo just the 
beginning of the adventure! 

You can have any number of encounters in the 
caverns. Perhaps someone has absconded with the 
cargo. The Mos Eisley Militia is now out in full force to 
find Bunji and may send an expedition down into the 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


caves. There may be any number of dangerous crea- 
tures and individuals hiding down here — Ranats, 
scurriers, womp rats, gangsters, rogue droids and so 
forth. 


With the cargo in hand, the characters and Bunji 
race to Docking Bay 65, while trying to avoid security 
patrols and Garindan's agents. As he heads up the 
Blood Freeze's boarding ramp, Bunji offers the charac- 
ters the espionage matrixes ... and promises to look 
them up again next time he's on-planet. 


oe —‏ س 


Harvest Day 


Harvest Day 


Harvest Day is one of Mos Eisley's biggest times of 
celebration. Thousands of moisture farmers converge 
on the desert spaceport, their skiffs and landspeeders 
burdened with water canisters, homemade wares, and 
fruits and vegetables fresh from underground hydro- 
ponics stations. In this time of hectic negotiating and 
celebration, Mos Fisley's citizens and the visiting farm- 
ers congregate in every shop, market and pub. The 
streets are filled with vendors and peddlers; spacers, 
aliens, droids and every being imaginable look for 
deals on precious goods and gaudy trinkets. 

However, with all the excitement comes trouble. 
Petty crime skyrockets as unscrupulous hoodlums 
engage in theft, vandalism and robbery. Tensions be- 
tween moisture farmers and rowdy spacers, fueled by 
free-flowing spirits and the excitement in the air, erupt 
into brawls and blaster-duels. 

With Harvest Day being tomorrow, the characters 
are approached by Mos Eisley Assistant Security Of- 
ficer Predne Balu. Because of a shortage of officers — 
and knowing the kind of chaos that tends to erupt 


during Harvest Day — he offers the characters 200 
credits each if they'll serve as temporary militia and 
help maintain order. If the characters bargain, he 
offers a bonus of 25 credits per criminal who's rounded 
up for any serious offenses. 


Staging Tips. Balu chooses the characters because 
it's assumed they've established their basic credibil- 
ity and morality to him in previous adventures. For 
example, in "Vested Interest" they try to save Beeyon 
Nace from slavery. Even though they might have 
worked against Balu in the past, perhaps he likes the 
way they do things — and besides, everyone else has 
already turned Balu down and they're the only ones 
left who he'd trust with a badge! 

A good motivation to get the characters involved is 
to have them being pursued by some of Mos Eisley's 
villainous thugs — Jabba's men, swoop gangers, or 
pirates will do. With the power of the law supporting 
them, the characters will have plenty of protection ... 
and they may even be able to bring these foes to 
justice. 


t Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


Training 

Once the characters agree to the job, Balu takes 
them to the Mos Eisley Police Station for training. He 
goes through a guick review of Mos Eisley's laws. (See 
pages 21-22 of Galaxy Guide 7.) 

Balu warns the characters to be cautious. Their job 
is to protect the citizens from harm; minor crimes are 
to be overlooked. He orders them to patrol the city — 
particularly the rough-and-tumble downtown starport 
area — and address situations as they encounter 
them. They can call for backup on their comlinks, but 
Balu makes it clear that he expects the characters to 
handle situations on their own. They have the author- 
ity to arrest anyone who's committed a serious of- 
fense, but for minor incidents their objective should 
be to calm everyone down and convince people to 
peacefully go about their business. 

He issues each character a stun pistol (4D stun 
damage, 5/10/25), identification badges, a comlink 
secured to the police comm frequency, and a blast 
vest (tan with blue lettering indicating "Mos Eisley 
Militia"; the twin suns design of Mos Eisley is also in 
blue). 

Balu warns the characters about the 
stormtroopers. He says that they're a 
nuisance because they can issue orders 
to just about everyone — including the 
characters. "They get their noses into 
the middle of every problem and just 
make things worse." 


The Harvest Arrives 


Harvest Day is a wild, city-wide event 
and things tend to get rather boisterous 
and rowdy. This adventure isn’t about com- 
bat — although there are a lot of physical 
obstacles. Rather, communication and 
roleplaying are the best methods for resolv- 
ing these situations. As representatives of the 
law, the characters are duty-bound to be good 
role models! 

The key to making this an entertaining adven- 
ture is to keep the characters constantly mov- 
ing. Characters have to deal with everything from 
mundane encounters — angry cantina patrons 
and petty thieves — to extremely dangerous situ- 
ations. Perhaps the characters have to defuse a 
bomb, protect a smuggler from Imperial 
stormtroopers (Balu explains, “I don’t want to 
know. If I don’t know about it, I don't have to file a 
report on it.”), or rescue a cargo of captured 
slaves from the clutches of Kollen Xa. Plot threads 
and subplots should continuously overlap: just as 
the characters are resolving one problem, 
another demands their attention. Never let 
them rest because there is so much going 
on! 

This adventure is also a great chance to re- 
introduce old friends and enemies, or introduce new 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


= Wale Diy | 


characters who will be playing a role in future adven- 
tures. For example, the characters may meet Diew 
Rejeff, a fair-minded and wealthy merchant who fig- 
ures prominently in the adventure “The Passage from 
Perdition.” This adventure is also a great chance to 
introduce famous personalities, perhaps including 
cameos by Jabba the Hutt, Bib Fortuna and even Boba 
Fett. 

Below is a list of several events that can happen 
during the day. 


Bank Robbery 

Three droids attempt to rob Zygian’s Banking Con- 
cern, believing that the bank “robbed” their master of 
his land. The misguided machines are trying to help 
him, but Zygian’s manager refuses to negotiate. One of 
the droids is obviously unstable and his “temper” is 
rising! 

The characters have a number of options. They may 
have to find the owner, who can talk the droids into 
cooperating ... but first the owner has to be convinced 
that he won't be carted off to jail due to the actions of 
his droids. Perhaps the characters can infiltrate the 
bank and find a way to slap restraining bolts onto the 
machines; or maybe some Jawas are willing to help 
deactivate the droids if they're allowed to keep them! 


Running the Gauntlet Swoop Race 
The characters are called in to stop two 
swoop gangs from “Running the Gauntlet.” 
This “game” involves racing through Mos 
Eisley’s crowded main streets as quickly 
as possible. Each swooper must dodge, 
ram and blast anything that gets in his 
way in an attempt to be the first one 
to the eastern edge of town. Of 
course, the swoopers aren't go- 
ingtoappreciate the characters 
stopping their fun! 


Spooked Rontos 

When a pair of rontos are 
spooked during the swoop race, it's 
up to the characters to stop them from 
stampeding into the main square! Can the 
characters and the rontos' Jawa owners 
calm down the massive creatures? 


Lost Child 

When a moisture farmer's small son is 
reported missing, it's up to the characters 
to find him. The true story can range from 
relatively inngcent — he got lost and is 
now following a bunch of Jawas around — 
to much more sinister: perhaps slavers 

are trying to increase their stock! 


Cantina Clamor 

A fight erupts at the Cantina (or a 
similar spacer bar) and the aliens, 
swoopers and thugs are prepared to 
settle things with blasters. Just as the 


Christopher Trevas 


characters think they have things under control, 
stormtroopers arrive to help ... and cause even more 
trouble. 


Berserkers ... 

A large alien has had a little too much lum and he's 
spoiling for a fight; a swoop gang is willing to oblige. 
Unfortunately, the alien has some very equally large 
and angry friends lurking about ... and stun settings 
don't seem to be affecting them! Can the characters 
resolve this situation peacefully? 


Harvest Day 


Domestic Dispute at the Inn 

When a Rodian couple have a domestic dispute 
(about who gets to hunt a specific bounty), their tussle 
spills into the street. While civilians flee the trouble, 
the characters get to mediate the situation ... only to 
have the bounty in question wander by! 


Out of Season 

The characters are making a call when a bounty 
hunter tries to capture one of them. Imagine the hunter's 
surprise when he discovers that he just tried to cap- 
ture a law officer! 


20 Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


The Passage From Perdition (91 


The Passage From 
Perdition 


Setting: The time is shortly after the death of Jabba 
the Hutt. While the Rebel fleet prepares for its assault 
on the Second Death Star, Mos Eisley is thrown into 
chaos in the aftermath of Jabba the Hutt's death. 


Mos Eisley is in turmoil. The countless criminal 
gangs and flunkies, once held in check by the fear of 
Jabba's wrath, have turned upon each other, waging 
an open gang war for control of the city. Meanwhile, 
Imperial Prefect Talmont struggles to protect the citi- 
zens: stormtrooper patrols comb the streets trying to 
round up troublemakers, while Mos Eisley's unarmed 
citizens hide behind barricaded doors and windows, 
hoping for an end to the conflict. 

This adventure is designed for characters who 
have reputations as upstanding, law-abiding citi- 
zens. Characters who did a good job during the 
adventure "Harvest Day" are particularly good for 
this adventure. The characters are contacted and 
asked to come to the Cantina. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


At the Cantina 

The characters are in the Cantina, which Chalmun 
is rebuilding after a recent firebombing attack by 
swoop gangers. Chalmun directs the remodelers, in- 
cluding several droids, much to the Wookiee's displea- 
sure. With Wuher the bartender translating, Chalmun 
explains that Diew Rejeff, a merchant and a good friend 
of his, disappeared three days ago. Diew is a promi- 
nent citizen with wealth and a strong desire to drive 
the Empire from Tatooine: he could rally the citizens 
todriveoutthegangsters and depose Prefect Talmont, 
allowing Tatooine to be a free world. Diew's off-world 
trading contacts would bring in enough business to 
keep Mos Eisley's economy stable. 

As Chalmun and Wuher conclude, the characters 
hear the sound of swoops racing by. A small firebomb 
bounces into the doorway, but two Artoo droids put 
the fires out quickly with their extinguishers. 

Chalmun, enraged by this attack, races out into the 
street and pulls one of the taunting swoopers from his 
vehicle. Five more swoop gangers close in on Chalmun, 


س 


IB The Passage From Perdition 


intending to kill the enraged Wookiee. (Chalmun's 
stats are on page 54 of Galaxy Guide 7.) 


Typical Swoop Trooper. All stats 2D except: blaster 
4D+2, dodge 3D, melee combat 4D, intimidation 3D, 
streetwise 2D+2, swoop operation 5D, brawling 4D+2. 
Move: 10. Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), various me- 
lee weapons (STR+2 to STR+3D), swoop. 


The characters (or other concerned citizens) move 
to save the Wookiee. As the swoops depart, one ganger 
identifies himself as *Mossol the Menace." He throws 
down a small tube and races away. 

The tube contains a flimsiplast sheet which says, 
“We are holding Rejeff. We want 50,000 credits by suns- 
up tomorrow or we kill him. Meet us outside the Lucky 
Despot. Don't try anything foolish — it would be a 
waste to have to kill your friend!" 

Chalmun is quite concerned and asks the charac- 
ters to see if they can find out where the swoopers are 
holding Rejeff and rescue him. Chalmun and the others 
will try to get the Imperials to investigate and gather 
the ransom money, although Chalmun is extremely 
upset at the prospect of paying ransom money to a 
bunch of thugs. 

Chalmun directs the characters to Abbot Drayk of 
the Dim-U Monastery and Valarian, the Whiphid who 
owns the Lucky Despot. Both of them might have 
information. 


On the Street 

Mos Eisley is under siege. Citizens shuffle along 
fearfully, ever wary of the whine of swoop motors. 
Stormtroopers check everyone's identity card and 
give the locals a hard time about the slightest infrac- 
tions. When stormtroopers aren't around, the gang- 
sters and swoopers emerge from the shadows, con- 
tinuing their turf war. 


Abbot Drayk. Having been under constant attack 
sincethe fighting began, Abbot Drayk and his *nonks" 
know very little about Rejeff. However, he says that he 
and his monks will be alert for information; he gives 
them a comlink (if they don't already have one) so he 
can contact them if something pops up. 


Lady Valarian. The Whiphid crime lord is uncoop- 
erative at first, but if the characters are persistent she 
helps them out. Valarian reveals that she established 
a treaty with Swang, leader of one of the more danger- 
ous swoop gangs. Valarian says the deal was simple — 
she stays out of his business, and he and his thugs 
don't bother her operations. However, Swang has 
already proven fartoo greedy, attacking several stores 
that were under her protection. Valarian says she'd 
much rather see his reign come to an abrupt end. 

She tells them that some of her *eyes" saw Swang 
himself come into the city on the day Rejeff disap- 
peared; he headed to Jabba's townhouse, which the 
gang appeared to have claimed. She knows the 
swoopers took at least one prisoner to the townhouse. 
By the next morning, all the swoopers were gone, 


having left sometime during the night. Since then, 
Swang hasn't been seen or heard from, but his men 
continue their raids. 


Jabba's Townhouse 

Thecharacters must again negotiate the dangerous 
streets of Mos Eisley to get to Jabba's townhouse. 
While a few sturdy swoop gang members guard the 
place, their security is far from perfect; quick-thinking 
characters should be able to use grapples to get onto 
the roof or climb up to a window. If the characters take 
the direct approach, these guards put up a good fight 
but they flee if two or more are wounded. 

Onceinsidethetownhouse, the characters find that 
the building has been cleaned out. All computers and 
records are gone. All furnishings have been removed. 
There are many blaster holes in the walls and floors — 
there was a savage battle for control of the townhouse. 
(For the layout of the townhouse, see pages 45—50 of 
Galaxy Guide 7.) 

The characters are attacked by a dozen kayven 
whistlers. These creatures, set free during the battle, 
hid when they heard the characters enter the 
townhouse. Oncethe whistlers realized that only a few 
people were in the building, their great appetites took 
control. 

If the characters search the nests of these voracious 
beasts (near the ceiling of the audience chamber), the 
characters spot Rejeff's comlink and identity card. 


Kayven Whistlers. Dexterity 4D, brawling parry 6D, 
Perception 2D, Strength 4D, brawling 6D. Move: 15. 
Razored teeth (STR+2D damage). 


There is a blasted servant droid in the last guest 
room. If they power up the droid (Very Easy droid 
repair roll), the droid begins reciting the last few 
seconds before it was blasted. The droid has an abra- 
sive, haughty and quite evil personality. Read aloud: 


*The master will be very upset that you stole the 
maps to his bunkers in the Swallowing Wastes. And 
holding Merchant Rejeff for ransom — he's been 
paying Master Jabba protection money for years. 
Jabba will feed you to the rancor for this!" 


Very soon the droid comes to its senses and de- 
mands to know who the characters are and what 
they're doing here. The droid is quite dismayed if it 
learns that Jabba is dead, although it mutters to itself 
that is should be able to make a fortune off the gullible 
citizens of the city. The droid refuses to cooperate 
further; if the characters decide to bring it along with 
them, it causes no end of trouble. 


Staging Tips. This droid — which refuses to divulge 
its name — is exceptionally obnoxious and mean- 
spirited. It seems to have greatly enjoyed serving 
Jabba. Play this droid so that the characters will want 
to blast it just to get it to shut up. 


Within moments, Abbot Drayk calls them on the 
comlink. He explains that he just intercepted a sub- 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


space conversation between Prefect Talmont and an 
Imperial Customs corvette which appeared in-system 
a few moments ago. 

Drayk plays the conversation aloud: the Customs 
corvette explains that no reinforcements are available 
as Imperial forces are otherwise occupied. Talmont 
sounds desperate, explaining that he can't keep the 
gang war going forever; he needs more forces to im- 
pose martial law on the city or else the citizens will rise 
up and cast him out of power when they find out about 
what happened at Endor. 

Drayk points out that if the city’s residents found 
out that Drayk was encouraging the gang war, he'd 
have a revolution on his hands. When the characters 
mention Jabba’s bunker in the Swallowing Wastes, 
Drayk summons them back to the Dim-U Monastery, 
where he outfits them with a landspeeder and a por- 
table scanner. 


Out in the Wastes 

The characters must search the Swallowing Wastes 
for the bunker. The barren area, far to the east of Mos 
Eisley, is considered as dangerous as the Jundland 
Wastes. It’s rumored that the area is populated by 
Tusken Raiders. 


Staging Tips. You can allow the characters to find 
the bunker with relatively few complications, or you 
may have them encounter Sand People, a starship 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


The Passage From Perdition (50) | 


wreck, moisture farmers, and perhaps even a swoop 
gang patrol headed to the bunker. 


The scanner detects Jabba’s bunker from two kilo- 
meters away. The mountains offer the characters plenty 
of cover to sneak up on the complex, which consists of 
an egg-shaped building. The scanner detects massive 
power readings, suggesting that much of the bunker is 
underground. Guards roam the perimeter in pairs. 

While the characters are checking out the bunker, 
they hear the roar of starship engines. Within mo- 
ments, six Z-95 Headhunter starfighters zoom over- 
head, heading towards the bunker. The mountainside 
suddenly parts to reveal a perfectly camouflaged han- 
gar bay. 


Staging Tips. Hopefully, the characters hid their 
landspeeder before the Z-95s arrived. While the Z-95s 
weren't scanning for vehicles, if the speeder was out in 
the open, you could decide that one of the Z-95 pilots 
spotted the speeder and reported it to Swang. In this 
case, a patrol of five swoops comes out to investigate 
— although this may give the characters a chance to 
subdue the none-too-bright swoop riders. 


Swoops. Speeder-scale, maneuverability 4D, move 
210; 610 kmh, body strength 1D. 


Z-95 Headhunters. Starfighter-scale, maneuverabil- 
ity 1D, space 6, atmosphere 330; 950 kmh, hull 4D, 
shields 1D. Weapons: 2 triple blasters (fire control 1D, 


———————— 


damage 3D), concussion missiles (fire control 1D, 
damage 7D). 


The characters have many ways of getting inside 
the bunker. They might try to slip through security, or 
they might beableto disguisethemselves as swoopers 
and race right inside. 


Inside the Bunker 

The bunker extends far underground. There are 
numerous patrols, but most of the guards are lazy and 
poorly-trained: unless the characters draw attention 
to themselves, none of the guards suspect that the 
characters don't belong there. 

When one of the guard patrols passes by, the char- 
acters overhear the guards talking amongst them- 
selves. One mentions Swang taking a “rich Mos Eisley 
merchant" for ransom; he's being held down in the 
prisoner cells on the bottom level. 

The other guard laughs and says he wonders what 
Swang will do with the ransom money — and with the 
merchant's body. "There's no way he's going to let 
Rejeff live. He's too dangerous for Swang to let him go.” 

A third guard jokes that it won't matter much, since 
Swang is going to use the Z-95 fighters to bomb Mos 
Eisley and wipe out the Imperials and gangsters who 
are fighting him. *And he'll bomb anyone else who 
stands up to him! Swang's going to rule Mos Eisley or 
he's going to burn the place down!” 


Completing the Rescue 

Rather than dictate a specific course of action, this 
section outlines a few of the players' options, along 
with guidelines for the final situation at the end of the 
battle. 

If the characters try to rescue Rejeff, they must skirt 
numerous patrols and incapacitate Rejeff's guards 


The Passage From Perdition 


before they sound the alarm. The characters may 
escape using their landspeeder, swoops or even the Z- 
95s; most likely, Swang's men follow, leading to a 
rousing chase across the desert. 

The characters can use their comlink to call Drayk 
for assistance. While several smuggler ships soon 
arrive to destroy the bunker and the hangar bay, the 
characters are discovered by Swang's men and must 
somehow escape from the bunker before it is de- 
stroyed. 


Conclusion. The conclusion of this adventure should 
set up the following situations: 


* Diew Rejeff should arrive in Mos Eisley, safe and 
unharmed. 


* Swang should still be alive — with much of his 
organization intact — but his Z-95s are destroyed or 
otherwise prevented from bombing Mos Eisley. 


During the brief celebration after Rejeff's return, a 
human claiming to be a member of the Rebel Alliance 
arrives. He introduces himself as Voren Na'al, Rebel 
Alliance Historian, and announces that the Emperor 
was killed in a battle in the remote Endor system. The 
Rebel Alliance has won the war against the Empire! 

Soon thereafter, Abbot Drayk plays the conversa- 
tion he recorded earlier between Prefect Talmont and 
the Imperial Customs corvette. Almost immediately, 
an attack plan is drawn up by Chalmun, Rejeff and 
Assistant Security Officer Predne Balu (who announces 
that he’s tired of Talmont’s corruption and is joining 
with the citizens). The citizens of Mos Eisley must 
defeat the Empire and the swoop gangers! 

Cut to the Star Wars Miniatures Battles scenario “A 
Line in the Sand.” 


—0 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


A Line in the Sand... 


doa 


Line in the 
Sand... 


A Star Wars Miniatures Dattles Scenario 


The Alliance has recently won the Battle of Endor 
and the Emperor is dead. The residents of Mos Eisley 
rally to the Alliance's cause in celebration ... and 
decide to end the Empire's rule on their world! 


The Situation 


This is a miniatures battles scenario for three play- 
ers: one player controls the Imperial forces, the sec- 
ond controls the Mos Eisley Militia forces, and the final 
player controls Swang's swoop gangs. 

With angry citizens on the march, Prefect Talmont 
has decided that discretion is the better part of valor 
... and probably a good way to stay alive. He and his 
bodyguards have fled to Docking Bay 87 to await the 
arrival of their escape shuttle. Unfortunately for 
Talmont, Mos Eisley's residents know where he is and 
have decided to attack the bay in hopes of capturing 
him. Meanwhile, a group of swoopers have decided 
that they shouldn't be left out of the fun and decide to 
join the battle! 


Imperial Forces 

The Imperials consist of three squads of 
sandtroopers, Prefect Talmont, and his personal body- 
guard droid, an Arakyd BT-16 attack unit. 


IM Guardian Squad 
m Sentinel Squad 


m Protector Squad 
* 10 Average Sandtroopers 
* DEX (1), blaster (3), grenade (2), melee combat (2); KNO 2; MEC 
2; PER 2; STR 2 (3), brawling 4; TEC 2; Move: 10. 
* Walk Rate: 6"; Run Rate: 11". 
* Weapons: blaster rifle. 
* Specialist: blaster (4). 
* Weapon: repeating blaster (non-tripod). 
* Squad Generation Points: 534. 


m Arakyd DT-16 Attack Droid 


* Type: Modified Attack Droid 

* DEX 4, blaster 6; KNO 1; MEC 1; PER 1; STR 5 (6); TEC 1; Move: 
14. 

* Walk Rate: 11"; Run Rate: 18". 

* Weapons: Taim & Bak repeating blaster (360* turret). 

* Squad Generation Points: 97. 


tar Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


The droid is programmed to protect Talmont and 
may not move more than 4" away from him. 


m Prefect Talmont 

* Imperial Prefect 

* DEX 3, dodge 5; КМО 4; MEC 2, beast riding 5; PER 3, command 

5; STR2; TE Move: 10. 

* Walk Rate: 8'; Run Rate: 13 

* Weapons: None 

* Squad Generation Points: 68 

Prefect Talmont is a coward; consequently, he may 
not defend himself or otherwise battle anyone. If any 
enemy figures (militia troops or swoop gangers) come 
within 1" of him, he is automatically captured. Other- 
wise, all normal rules for capturing and guarding pris- 
oners apply, as per page 41 of the Star Wars Miniatures 
Battles Companion. 

Mos Eisley Militia 

The militia group is determined to capture Prefect 
Talmont and put him on trial for his crimes against the 
people of Mos Eisley. 

There are three squads and three heroes. At the 
beginning ofthe battle, Chalmun commands the Cantina 
Commandos, Predne Balu commands the Mos Eisley 
Security Squad, and Diew Rejeff commands the Rejeff's 
Legion squad. However, command may be delegated 
to soldiers within the squads so the three heroes can 
act on their own. 


m Chalmun the Wookiee 
* Mos Eisley Hero 
* DEX 2, bowcaster 6, dodge 3, grenade 3, melee combat 3; KNO 
2; MEC 2, beast riding 4; PER 2, command 5; STR 4, brawling 6; TEC 
2; Move: 10. 
* Walk Rate: 7"; Run Rate: 12" 
* Weapons: Bowcaster, 2 grenades. 
* Sguad Generation Points: 93. 


m Predne Balu 
* Mos Eisley Hero 
* DEX 4, blaster 6, dodge 5, melee combat 5; KNO 3, streetwise 4; 
MEC 3; PER 4, command 5; STR 2, brawling 4; TEC 2; Move: 10. 
* Walk Rate: 9"; Run Rate: 14”. 
* Weapons: Blaster rifle, 2 grenades, vibroblade 
* Squad Generation Points: 100 


m Diew Rejeff 


* Mos Eisley Hero 
* DEX3, blaster 5, dodge 5; KNO 2; MEC 3; PER 4, command 5; STR 
3; TEC 3; Move: 10. 


— uuu —— 


———€«» ——— | 


(Ж) A Line іп the Sand... 


* Walk Rate: 8"; Run Rate: 13". 
* Weapons: Blaster rifle, 2 grenades, vibroblade. 
* Squad Generation Points: 90. 


m Contina Commandos 
m Mos Eisley Security 


m Rejeff's Legion 

* 10 Average Troopers 

* DEX 3, blaster 5; KNO 2; MEC 2; PER 2, command 3; STR 2, 

brawling 3; TEC 2; Move: 10. 

* Walk Ra! ; Run Rate: 13". 

* Weapons: blaster pistol. 

* Squad Generation Points: 340. 
Swang's Swoop Gang 

Swang's swoop gang, led by Mossol the Menace, 
simply wants to cause as much trouble as possible. In 
addition to Mossol, there are seven other swoops and 
their riders. They've set their sights on capturing 
Prefect Talmont ... and if they can get their hands on 
any of the Militia heroes as well, that would make the 
battle even sweeter. 


m Mossol the Menace 
* Swoop Thug 
* DEX 3, blaster 5, dodge 5, grenade 5; KNO 2; MEC 3, repulsorlift 
operation 6; PER 4, command 5; STR 3; TEC 3; Move: 10. 
* Walk Rate: 8"; Run Rate: 13". 
* Weapons: Blaster rifle, 4 grenades, vibroblade. 
* Squad Generation Points: 114. 


m Swoop Gongers 
* 7 Veteran Swoopers 
* DEX 3, blaster 5; KNO 2; MEC 2, repulsorlift operation 5; PER 2, 
command 4; STR 3, brawling 4; TEC 2; Move: 10. 
* Walk Rate: 8”; Run Rate: 13". 
* Weapons: Blaster rifle. 
* Commander: command 5. 
* Squad Generation Points: 343. 


m Swoops (8) 
* Drive System: Repulsorlift 
* Crew: 1 
* Passengers: 1. 
* # Turns: 3. 
* Turn Distance: 2. 
* Move: 140. 
* Cautious Speed: 14. 
* Cruise Speed: 42. 
* Top Speed: 140. 
* Accel/Decel: 14/14. 
* Hight Ceiling: 10 meters. 
* Body Strength: 1. 
* Body Points: 10. 
* Cover: 4. 
* Squad Generation Points: 824 


The Battlefield 


The map printed here is one-quarter actual minia- 
tures battle scale. (One inch on this map represents 
eight meters.) 

The battle takes place inside Docking Bay 87. The 
walls of the bay are sheer, smooth surfaced plascrete 
that cannot be climbed. The walls are one level tall; the 
swoops can get into the bay by flying over the walls. 

The bay’s floor is clear terrain, except for the cargo 


containers strewn all over the bay floor. The crates are 
waist-high, so they provide medium cover; for figures 
trying to climb over the crates, the crates count as 
difficult barriers. These crates may be moved; the figure 
must be in base-to-base contact with the crate and 
cannot attack that round. One figure can move a crate at 
one-half his or her walk rate. Two figures working to- 
gether can move a crate their full walk rate (if the walk 
rates are different, use the lower of the two numbers). 


Cargo Doors 

Docking Bay 87 has a Primary Cargo Door (on the 
west) and three Secondary Cargo Doors (on the north, 
east, and south). Each has large, sliding doors. Each 
door has controls panels on both the outside and the 
inside of the docking bay (control panels are indicated 
on the map). 

A figure must be in base-to-base contact with a 
control panel for a full turn to activate a cargo door; the 
panel controls the nearest door. Once a panel is acti- 
vated, the door must completely open or close before 
the panel can be activated again. 

The Primary Cargo Door opens at the end of the turn 
when its control panel is activated. The three Second- 
ary Cargo Doors open at the end of the next turn after 
the control panel is activated. 


Terrain Features 

There are a number of doors which enter into 
Docking Bay 87. Entry Door 1 leads to Entry Door 2 and 
Entry Door 3, both of which are on the bay’s floor level. 
Stairwell 1 leads to Entry Door 4, which emerges on the 
bay’s floor level. Stairwell 2 leads to the Balcony, 
which provides medium cover. (Remember that stairs 
are considered rough terrain.) 

Because of the cramped corridors, a maximum of 
three figures may pass through a door in one round. 


The Set-Up 


The Imperial player places his forces first; all fig- 
ures must be inside Docking Bay 87. (They may not be 
on the balcony or inside the doors; they must be out in 
the open, on the docking bay floor.) 

The Imperial player must place all crate counters 
within the outer landing circle. The Imperial player 
secretly marks two crates with an “X”; these crates 
contain grenades. 

The grenades are inactive until an Imperial figure 
arms them by spending a full turn adjacent to a crate; 
the character may take no other action in the turn. 

The bomb is now active. When the bombs are active, 
any figure that comes within 1" of the crate activates the 
bomb, which explodes with a Damage Strength of 7 and 
affects everything within 2.5". (Use the “Grenade Burst 
Area of Effect Template: 2.5" Radius” to determine which 
figures are affected by the blast.) 


The Rebel forces set up second. Rebel units may be 
set up anywhere outside Docking Bay 87. 


Swang's Swoop Gang sets up last. All swoop gangers 
must be within the Swoop Gang Set-Up Area. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


E Orders of the Day 
Mos Eisley Militia 


Commander. Imperial Prefect Talmont is on 
the run from your forces. Intelligence reports 
that he and several squads of stormtroopers are 
hiding in Docking Bay 87 while awaiting a rescue 
shuttle. 


You have three squads and three heroes. Set 
up each squad on the street outside Docking Bay 
87. You have several means of entry into the 
Docking Bay, including stairs, sliding cargo doors 
and a balcony overlooking the bay. 


Victory. Capture Prefect Talmont so he may 
be put on trial. (Talmont is automatically cap- 
tured if any of your soldiers approach within 1" of 
him.) 


Orders of the Day 


Imperial Commander 
669.462/52 


Commander. You have been ordered to pro- 
tect and escort Prefect Talmont during the evacu- 
ation of Mos Eisley. 

Your men may not leave the Docking Bay, 
although they may move crates to set up cover. 
You may open and close the cargo doors using 
the control panels indicated on the map. 

The Arakyd security droid must remain within 
4" of Prefect Talmont at all times. Talmont is 
automatically captured if any enemy soldiers 
approach within 1" of him. 

The rescue shuttle cannot land unless all crates 
are moved outside the Outer Landing Circle. 


Victory. Get Prefect Talmont to the rescue 
shuttle when it lands. 


Star Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


"A Line in the Sand... (50) | 


Orders of the Da 
рф y 


Swang's Swoopers 


Mossol the Menace. Today is a good day to 
burn Mos Eisley down to the ground! Swang and 
the gang are busy looting other parts of the city, 
so it’s up to you to make your mark by taking out 


Prefect Talmont and those do-gooder militia he- 
roes. 


Victory. You achieve a complete victory if you 
capture or kill both Prefect Talmont and one of 
the Militia heroes: Chalmun, Predne Balu or Diew 
Rejeff. 

You achieve a minor victory if you capture or 
kill one of these individuals. 


Complications 


At the beginning of the game, roll two dice and add 
five to the result. This gives you a total between seven 
and 17 — this is the number of rounds until the rescue 
shuttle arrives. 

If all crates are outside the Outer Landing Circle, the 
shuttle lands in Docking Bay 86. If Prefect Talmont is 
uninjured and not captured by the enemy, the Imperial 
player wins the game. 

However, if any crates are still within the Outer 
Landing Circle, the shuttle diverts to Docking Bay 86 
(across the street). In this case, give the Imperial 
player the following orders of the day. 


Orders of the Day 
Imperial Commander 
669.462/52 


Read Aloud to All Other Players. In the heat 
of battle, you overhear a stormtrooper squad 


leader shout, "Therescue shuttle has diverted to 
Docking Bay 86! We have to get the Prefect out of 
here!" 

Your troops may now leave the docking bay. 


Victory. You must get Prefect Talmont to the 
entrance to Docking Bay 86, where he boards his 
rescue shuttle. 


p Docking Boy 86 
„Entry Door 7 


Control 
Panel 


-" Control 


С» > 

„7. Primary Cargo . Ж .. . s E is 
* Door. `. x Control * ° 
m 1 ; Panel i 


Stairway 1 . 
BR FCS 


ШЦ 


1 inch = 8 meters 


Stairway D” 


+ Control. ; 
i. Panel . 


o e 
Ww . 4 


. Control”, , 
Panel . 


Secondary: 
S t Cargo * „а 


TUA ATE ААЛ 


TOS. ar ar 
Outer Landing Circle 


- А , . с 
^ Control -: ° 
(c *. 5. Panel 


T = - —_ : | е сЕ 


куст: 


-sne s 


= Control Panel `` 


1əd001} 
-pues 


juouie |, 
aad 


19doon 
-pues 


зәдшәр] 
еши 


jadoon 
-pues 


1əd001} 
-pues 


19d001 
-pues 


19d001] 
-pues 


OIGIA Чим 
ләдшәр{ 
БШ 


eng 


i 


ләдшәр 


uewoq 


1 19d001) 
-pues 


1əd001} 
-pues 


1oquisjA 
eni 
иешом 


ЕЯ 


Jaquiayy 
епи 


1əd001} 
“pues 


aaquoW 
eng 


1əd001} 
-pueg 


ıaquaN 
ипи 


hereby granted to photocopy this page for personal use 


Adventure Hooks 


on 


Adventure Hooks 


These adventure hooks are set after Return of the Jedi: 
the specific timing of these adventures is dependent 
upon the needs of your campaign. 

As shown in “The Passage from Perdition” and “A Line in 
the Sand,” after Jabba’s death, Mos Eisley is the site of a 
horrible gang war. However, the people soon unite, driving 
both the gangsters and the Empire out of their city, An era 
of peace arrives, as celebrations are held across the city. 

However, the future is perilous for this desert space- 
port. After the declaration of the New Republic, Tatooine 
is still in a period of upheaval. The planet's new govern- 
ment is tenuously allied with the New Republic, but 
criminal interests still play a strong role in day-to-day life 
on the desert world. While Jabba’s empire is shattered, 
many newcomers are eager to carve out their own niche. 
The Empire no longer rules this planet, but a number of 
Imperial weapons caches are hidden deep in the desert ... 
and Imperial sympathizers are numerous. The limited 
series X-Wing Rogue Squadron: Battleground: Tatooine 
from Dark Horse Comics provides excellent background 
information on Tatooine during this time period. 


Trouble in the Desert 


The characters are in a small moisture farming village 
when they hear stories of recent Tusken Raider attacks on 
outlying farms. They are befriended by one of the local 
families and asked (or hired) to defend their farm. 

During the night, the farm is attacked and many of the 
moisture vaporators are destroyed. The family faces 
financial ruin. 

The next morning, another farmer — Walt Brennorn — 
comes around to explain that he’s forming a town militia. 
Everyone who pays dues of 400 credits per month will be 
protected; everyone who declines is on their own. 


The Real Story. Some of the recent raider attacks are 
real ... but other attacks are being staged by thugs hired 
by Brennorn. Walt is allied with one of the new crime 
lords in Mos Eisley and he plans to stir up trouble and 
extort money from his neighbors. 

If the farmers won't pay for protection, Brennorn's 
thugs stage “Tusken Raider” attacks and destroy as much 
machinery as possible. Brennorn reasons that most of 
the farms will have to declare bankruptcy, so he will be 
able to buy up the land for a pittance. 

Brennorn has also riled up the local Tusken population 
by attacking them. Just as the characters begin to figure out 
who's really causing trouble, the real Tusken Raiders de- 
cide to get vengeance and attack some of the local moisture 
farms. Can the characters protect the farms and expose 
Brennorn as the cause of the trouble? 


Tusken Raiders. All stats 2D except: Dexterity 2D+1, 
blaster: blaster carbine 3D+1, brawling parry 4D+1, dodge 
4D+1, melee combat: gaffi stick 4D, survival 4D, survival: 
desert 5D+2, Mechanical 1D, beast riding 3D, beast riding: 


tar Wars Mos Eisley Adventure Set 


bantha 4D+2, hide 2D+1, search 2D+2, sneak 3D+1, Strength 
3D+2, brawling 4D+2, lifting 4D«2, stamina 4D, Technical 
1D. Move: 10. Equipment: blaster carbine (5D), gaffi stick 
(STR+2D), breath mask. 


Murder by Droid 


Mace Windu's droids are killing their owners. The Mos 
Eisley Policethrow the poor Squib droid broker in prison, 
assuming that he is responsible for the attacks. 

The characters just bought a new droid from Mace, 
and when they go to check the programming they find 
more then they bargained for ... 


The Real Story. Upon checking their droid's program- 
ming, the characters discover that one of the “junk-droids” 
Windu bought from the Jawas was once a interpreter droid 
of Jabba the Hutt's. However, the droid was tortured for 
Jabba's pleasure! Now the droid sees every being except 
Mace (who helped repair him) as a minion of Jabba the 
Hutt. And all of Jabba's allies must die! 


For Your Visual Organs Only... 


New Republic Intelligence (NRI) sends the characters 
to investigate the possibility of an unknown alien ship 
crashing on Tatooine! This is a top-secret mission — 
rumors suggest that the ship may belong to a strange 
alien species named the "Ssi-ruuk"! 

(Sincethe "Bakura Incident" is considered classified by 
the New Republic, the characters will probably need a 
briefing. See the Bantam novel The Truce at Bakura as well 
as The Truce at Bakura Sourcebook for more information.) 


The Real Story. It wasn't a Ssi-ruuvi ship that crash- 
landed in the Jundland Wastes ... but a Charon Death Cult 
scout ship! The ship is badly damaged and many of the 
Charon aboard were killed. Jawa sandcrawler tracks lead 
away from the wreck. 

Unknown to the characters, the Jawas took in several 
injured Charon warriors; when the warriors returned to 
consciousness, they overpowered and killed the Jawas. 
After destroying the sandcrawler, the Charon warriors 
set out on foot for the nearby town of Bestine. Can the 
heroes defeat the insectoids beforethey havea chanceto 
spread their "news" by killing all the inhabitants of Bestine? 


Charon Warriors. All stats 2D except: Dexterity 4D, 
blaster 4D, dodge 5D, survival 3D, Perception 4D, search 
4D+2, sneak 6D, Strength 4D, brawling 4D+1. Special At- 
tacks: Poison claw attack (STR+1D, victim must make a 
Moderate stamina roll, failure results in an additional 
wound; Charon must spend one round secreting poi- 
son.). Equipment: Web spinneret (traps victim, body 
strength 3D+1), plasma blaster (4D). 


For more information on the Charon, see Galaxy Guide 4: 
Alien Races, Otherspace and Otherspace II: Invasion. 


ыс ыыы кшш шшш шш шыш шшш шшш AN —‏ ڪڪ 


uezeaq "IJ 


uiss&qy 
Əy} OA 


11001 
-ә[88еи$ 


шршд 
шоя 


CINN 
Aa|stq SOW 


хе-олаіл 
чим еши 
Кә|5їд SOW 


пршд\ ƏN ләре 
әзер uoAaag emer uoxsn | рчащм 


J9pstuA 
u9oa4ey 


Ruddy 


иешом 
Хә, MAL 


Permission is hereby granted to photocopy this page for personal use. 


Е 


GALA XY С UIDE 7 


MOS EISLEY 


by Martin Wixted 


Development and Editing: Bill Smith 
Graphics: John Paul Lona * Cover Art: Lucasfilm Ltd. 
Interior Art: John Paul Lona, Allen Nunis, Mike Vilardi 
Additional Illustrations: Paul Jaquays, Mike Manley, Lucasfilm, Ltd. 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter • A: 
Associate Publishe Manager: Richard Hawran 
Editors: Greg Farshtey, Bill Smith, Ed Stark * Art Direc! 
Assist. 


Published by 


жу 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40069 


®, ™ and © 1993 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Introduction 


ШШ introduction 


"Mos Eisley Spaceport ... you will never find a 
more wretched hive of scum and villainy.” 


Two figures saunter with a measured gait down 
a narrow, dusty alley: one is a Human, the other 
a Droid. The sandstone walls protect them from 
the terrible brightness of the twin suns but not 
the oppressive heat. A small cowled figure de- 
taches herself from a doorway and approaches 
them. 

Thereis some discussion as the woman shows 
themana package concealed beneath her shabby 
cloak. Theman fingers the bagof spicethe woman 
offers, and then hands it to the Droid for exami- 
nation with a sensor probe. The manis thumbing 
amoney pouch around his waist when the Droid 
makes a disparaging comment. 

The woman points a threatening finger at the 
Droid, and then at the man. The man lets go of 
both the spice and his money and shoves her. 
She replies with a blur of motion — a blaster 
pistol is suddenly in her hand and there are two 
flashes of green blaster fire. The man drops, then 
the Droid. She quickly finds the coin pouch and 
covers the bodies with debris. She strolls away 
unhurriedly. 

The woman walks down the alley with confi- 
dence. It is a rich haul. And no one will ask 
questions about what has happened. She knows 
that she has mastered the ways of Mos Eisley in 
a way that few others will. Now, it is time for a 
brief celebration. 

She fails to notice the three ruffians watching 
from one of the rooftops. They move in and drop 
alasso. It lands expertly around her neck — they 
have done this before. She is soon forced to part 
with her ill-gotten gains and her last breath. The 
ruffians hurry away. 

Meanwhile, a maintenance Droid on a break 
from work saunters past the two bodies. It stops 
upon hearing the damaged Droid's plea for help 
and bends over the helpless Droid, rummaging 
around. It grabs a pair of the Droid's servomo- 
tors, ripping them from the damaged Droid's 
legs. It then continues down the alley. 


AR 
ARS 


Beware! 


Welcome to Mos Eisley! Galaxy Guide 7: Mos 
Eisley presents an in-depth look at this famous 
pirate spaceport. Known in many guarters as the 
home base of the infamous crime lord Jabba the 
Hutt, Mos Eisley is a dark and dangerous city with 
profits to be made and lives to be lost. 

This traveler's guide offers you a glimpse into 
the people and places of the notorious space- 
port, with illustrations, diagrams, maps and game 
statistics for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition. 

This book takes you to the back streets and 
docking bays of a pirate city famous for its dan- 
gers and opportunities. Characters come to life 
and the famous Mos Eisley Cantina and many 
other fantastic locations are now ready for your 
own Star Wars adventures. 

This book contains detailed information on 
the city, but it is suggested that the gamemaster 
have Tatooine Manhunt for additional informa- 
tion, as well as a beautiful full-color map of the 
interior of the city. If gamemasters are looking for 
additional interesting characters to populate Mos 
Eisley, refer to Galaxy Guide 1: A New Hope and 
Galaxy Guide 5: Return of the Jedi. 

Naturally, this guidebook is useful for running 
adventures in and about Mos Eisley. This book 
allows the characters to wander freely in this 
interesting location, while giving the gamemaster 
information on many new locations, breathing 
life into this city. 

Additionally, most of the information in this 
book can easily be transported to other rough- 
and-tumble trade cities. For example, the person- 
alities inhabiting the Mos Eisley cantina can be 
transported to another spacer bar halfway across 
the galaxy. Anywhere a sizable collection of be- 
ings congregate, aided by an ever-present under- 
world and a policy of free trade, you can find a 
place suitable for mayhem. Mos Eisley is but one 
of many such areas in the galaxy. 

After skimming through this book, the poten- 


Mos Eisley 


аў ГА Introduction 
ВЫЫ 


ЖМА 


tial for adventure should be obvious. The texture 
of Mos Eisley is rundown and derelict. There are 
transients in alleys and dark forms flittering to 
and fro down dark passageways. All five senses 
are assaulted. 

The winding stairs, dark alleys, crumbling 
buildings and random mine shafts are great for 
running battles. A landspeeder chase, conversely, 
is likely to end quickly because skewed alleys 
narrow suddenly or turn abruptly. 

A lack of police protection makes the often- 
messy consequences of a firefight nonexistent. 
This attitude is reflected in most of the inhabit- 
ants. As long as you do not damage their prop- 
erty or injure them, they are not likely to take 
much notice. 

Characters can also get pulled into corporate 
espionage adventures — the key is to grab what 
is needed before the shooting starts. Characters 
can become involved in the massive organiza- 
tion of Jabba the Hutt, or simply run into the 
countless small-time hoods who inhabit the back 
alleys of the city. 

The factory areas to the north of the city offer 
a slight change of scenery — the piping and 
caverns of the oil rig-like buildings and aban- 
doned mining tunnels add suspense. Remember 
when the Millennium Falcon was going through 
the tunnel inside the second Death Star? The 
pipes and corridors created by the superstruc- 
ture of the battle station was a terrific back- 
ground for a high-speed chase. Keep the Death 
Starin mind when your smugglers careen through 
abandonedoilrefinery platforms and closed Droid 
construction plants. The caverns are great for 
"bug hunts" or “hide and shoot" scenarios: the 
cavernous chambers and overhead spars create 
ominous shadows behind which might be lurking 
... anything. 

In short, Mos Eisley is a great setting for many 
different kinds of stories, all with danger, excite- 
ment and adventure unique to the Star Wars 
universe. 


Mos Eisley 


Slang of the Sands 


Mos Eisley has its own terminology, just like any other 
city across the galaxy. Some of the more choice bits which 
visitors may stumble over are listed below. 


Bantha Fodder: Worthless or waste. "You won't be 
worth bantha fodder." 

Binary: As in, “You can be so binary at times." Meant as 
a criticism, denoting extreme stubborness, or inability to 
compromise on an issue. 

Bloated One: Specifically Jabba the Hutt, but can be 
used as a disparaging reference to any Hutt. 

Buy the Depp: To die, usually violently. Rather recent, 
named for the former Prefect. Probably started in the 
police force. 

Feed the Sarlacc: To disappear, never to be seen again; 
to hide from legal authorities. 

Final Jump: To die, usually peacefully. Origin is from 
the jump to lightspeed. 

First Twilight: The time between the first and second 
sunsets. 

Gravel Maggot: (Also "feed like a gravel maggot.") A 
disparaging term for a person who takes advantage of 
others. Named after a native scavenger. 

Grease the Servomotors: To bribe an official. 

Jawa Trader: Anyone who isn't honest, or trades in 
stolen or badly damaged goods. Other comparisons to 
Jawas often involve dishonesty as well. 

Moisture Boy: Young moisture farmers who come to 
Mos Eisley wild-eyed and with no common sense. Refers to 
anyone who doesn't know his or her way around. Warn- 
ing: Using this phrase in farming communities is a good 
way to start a fight. 

Lost in the Wastes: To be totally unprepared for a 
situation. Refers to getting lost in the Jundland Wastes. 

Sand Mine: Something worthless. Something that any- 
one with common sense should know better than to get 
involved with. 

Suns-scorched ball: Tatooine. 

Tatoo: The Imperial Reference for Tatooine's twin suns, 
Tatoo I and Tatoo Il. 

Tourist: A person unableto get anything done. Refers to 
Governor Tour Aryon's inability to accomplish anything. 
Deliberately confusing to visitors. 


Chapter One: Tatooine АВ 
mE === Zu —WARS 


I Chapter One 


Tatooine 


"It was a vast, shining globe and it cast a light of 
lambent topaz into space — but it was not a sun. 
Thus, the planet had fooled travelers for a long 
time. Not until entering close orbit around it did its 
discoverers realize that this was a world in a binary 
system and not a third sun itself." 


Like many other frontier planets plotted by 
the Republic Survey Corps during the heyday of 
the Old Republic's expansion, the first planet in 
the tri-planetary system J11.9 looked to be a 
promising source of minerals and other raw ma- 
terials for a hungry galaxy. The initial (admit- 
tedly cursory) inspection turned up no intelli- 
gent indigenous life forms, and the planet was 
approved for colonization. 

Settlers were plentiful back then. The Repub- 
lic had been growingin leaps and bounds. But the 
Republic was unimaginably huge. Millions of hab- 
itable worlds had been catalogued by the time 
they discovered this little planet — it took time to 
settle them. 

So it was no surprise that almost a thousand 
years passed before the first official Republic 
colony ships dotted the surface of the rugged 
planet. No matter what conditions might be like 
on the new world, the settlers were convinced 
that it was superior to what they had left behind. 


First Contact 


As is now known, there were indeed indig- 
enous life forms. One species was encountered 
soon after the settlers arrived. Although instinc- 
tive cowards, these small beings seemed covet- 
ous of the Republic's technology. 

Whatever their origin, these intelligent, ro- 
dent-like scavengers avoided direct contact with 
the settlers, and communicated in a language 
indecipherable to the new homesteaders. The 
leader of the new colony, Melnea Arnthout, sug- 
gested letting the enigmas be. There was an 
urgency evident in this request: one ofthe colony 
ships, the Dowager Queen, had crashed many 
kilometers away while on final approach, deny- 


Tatooine 


Type: Terrestrial 

Temperature: Hot 

Atmosphere: Type | (Breathable) 

Hydrosphere: Dry 

Gravity: Standard 

Terrain: Desert 

Length of Day: 23 Standard Hours 

Length of Year: 304 Local Days 

SapientSpecies: Humans, Jawas(N), Tusken 
Raiders(N) 

Starport: Standard Class 

Population: 80,000 (Estimated. There has 
never been a census taken on Tatooine.) 

Planet Function: Smuggling, trade, subsis- 
tence 

Government: Imperial Governor 

Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: Illegal munitions (smuggled), 
illegal security devices (smuggled), ille- 
gal drugs (smuggled), minerals (salt, 
sand-products) 

Major Imports: Mid-technology, high-tech- 
nology, metals, foodstuffs, chemicals 
Points of Interest: Mos Eisley Spaceport, 

Jabba the Hutt's Palace 


System Data 


Region: Outer Rim Territories 
Sector: Arkanis 

Moff: Alexander Julstan IV 
Governor: Tour Aryon 
System Name: Tatoo 

Star Name: Tatoo І, Tatoo 11 
Star Type: Yellow Binary 


Orbital Bodies 


Name Type 
Tatooine Hot Terrestrial 
Ohann Gas Giant 
Adriana Gas Giant 


Mos Eisley 


STA 
"WA 


S 


ing the remaining colonists extra supplies, leav- 
ingnot even the slimmest margin for error. It was 
critical to finish getting the water, power, and 
food processors up and running. That first sea- 
son was difficult: sandstorms nearly destroyed 
every building, most ofthe Banthas disappeared, 
and barely enough food was grown. The settle- 
ment, dubbed Bestine by the new homesteaders, 
barely survived that first precarious season. 

The disappearance of Melnea's protocol Droid 
after just one season changed everything. The 
settlers were enraged; Melnea knew that she 
must act quickly — not only to assuage her 
group's fear and regain valuable property, but to 
prevent this from happening again. She needed 
to begin negotiations, but she was a settler and 
had little experience as a diplomat. Neverthe- 
less, Melnea decided to make the attempt her- 
self. She succeeded in opening a dialogue with 
the local group of Jawas who had taken her 
Droid. 

With theaid ofthe Jawas, the Republic settlers 
adopted the Jawa term for the planet (“Tah-doo- 
Een-e"), learned the names of various land fea- 
tures and wildlife (such as the Dewback lizard 
that Melnea aided), and were warned about the 
second form of intelligent life on Tatooine that 
was somehow missed by the Republic Survey 
Corps: the Sand People. 

The colonists expanded, founding Fort Tusken 
in the Jundland Wastes far to the north. Both 
Bestine and Fort Tusken got down to the serious 


А 


Mos Eisley 


- 


Le 


7 
ET 
Ж 


The Sand People 


Theorigin ofthe Sand Peopleis yet another area of great 
debate. Some scholars believe that it is likely these savage 
warriors evolved from a long-forgotten colonization at- 
tempt by an unknown species; others theorize that they 
simply evolved on the planet. 

They are savage, but fearful, known to attack only when 
they have a clear numeric advantage. They seem to have 
a nearly symbiotic relationship with Banthas (it is un- 
known whether the Banthas were stolen from the colo- 
nists, or, as on many other worlds, they were present on 
Tatooine prior to colonization), and also utilize some 
technology, such as blasters stolen from their victims. 

For now, their history and background is a mystery; 
perhaps someday, scientists will acquire a Tusken Raider 
for examination, but as of yet, none have been captured. 


Chapter One: Tatooine 


business of ore mining and learned the delicate 
art of coaxing moisture from the atmosphere for 
growing crops. However, the Sand People made 
their presence known. The first attack on Fort 
Tusken lacked the element of surprise, but still 
resulted in casualties. 

Over the next several seasons the colonists 
sparred with the newly named Tusken Raiders. 
The settlers apparently were deemed to be too 
much trouble to tangle with, and the new resi- 
dents determined that the population of the Sand 
People was too small to pose any real threat. The 


Chapter One: Tatooine === 1 JA Ps 


аиа. 


ARS 


Between A Rock And A Hard Place 


Melnea set out into the hot desert at first twilight. 
As she walked into the darkening hills, she hoped she 
could win over the small creatures by approaching 
themaloneand unarmed. Scramblingover a small hill, 
she paused. Despite the setting suns, the desert was 
still too hot. But she knew it would soon turn bitter 
cold. She checked the parka and tools stored in her 
backpack, swept her long black hair back behind her 
ears, and resumed her hiking. 

„Another hour's walk brought her scraped hands 
and knees, but no sign of the elusive residents. For all 
she knew, they were watching her from the dark 
regions of the canyons. Rounding a corner, she sud- 
denly spotted a group ofthetiny folk cornered against 
arock outcropping. Facing them was what looked to 
be a huge reptile. It was whimpering in pain as its 
massive head lolled from side to side. Melnea saw 
immediately that the lizard's bleeding front paw was 
caught in a fissure of rock. She also saw that the beast 
was well within range of the little creatures, who 
could only huddle in fear. 

She moved swiftly, throwing a rock behind the 
beast. Thelizard turned away, toward the distraction, 
and she moved in closer. Grabbing a hydroshovel 
from her backpack, she wedged it in the crevice and 
yanked. There was no change, and the beast was 
turning back to her. She dodged a front paw plunked 
down blindly by the lizard as it attempted to twist free 
its foot. 

Melnea grabbed a piton from her pack and, using 
the hydroshovel as a hammer, chipped away at the 
sides of the fissure. Her hair fell into her face. She 
could feel the warm air blowing from the beast's 
nostrils as she worked. She concentrated on chiseling 
away at the stone. 

Then its head blocked out the final light of the 
second twilight as its jaws dipped toward her. She 
gave the hydroshovel one last pound, the rock splin- 
tered, and the lizard suddenly heaved itself free. It 
snorted once or twice, but made no move to attack. 
Instead, it lay down and licked its injury. 


With that, the brown-clad natives grabbed a heavy 
cable and threw it over the beast's head. They jab- 
bered to each other in that language Melnea and her 
friends had puzzled over for so long, and finally 
beckoned for her to follow. With her heart soaring, 
she walked behind them as they led her to a nearby 
area. It was asmall village hidden among the cliffs and 
mountains of the area. A corral of sorts was set up, in 
which two other beasts like this one appeared to be 
grazing for moisture, pushing their noses deep into 
the desert gravel. 

The creatures put the lizard in the stockade and 
disappeared into a cave. Melnea followed. Although it 
was dark out, the utter blackness of the cave required 
some adjustment. She paused, trying to listen. Surely 
these creatures weren't capable of seeing in the dark? 
Suddenly a metal arm grabbed her and a voice ex- 
claimed, “Mistress Melnea! Oh, thank goodness!” 

“Twopio? Is that you?” 

“Thank heavens you've come! These Jawas ... these 
creatures! Oh, my. And not an oil bath anywhere to be 
found!” 

Melnea grinned and relaxed. It was, indeed, 2PO. 
“Twopio, is that their name? Jawas?” 

She could almost sense the Droid straightening 
himself up, in a move as close to a strut as was 
mechanically possible. 

“Yes, Mistress. I have had ample opportunity to be 
immersed into their culture and have managed to 
decipher some of their language, complex as it is. 
They call themselves Jawas. And they, uh, borrowed 
me mostly out of curiosity, not malice.” 

Melnea patted 2PO's arm. She knew the high-strung 
Droid. When the Jawas first captured him, he prob- 
ably thought he was about to be eaten or broken down 
for parts. She realized he had had terrific motivation 
to learn the language, for which she was very thankful. 
As she sat down, a stove deeper in the cave glowed to 
life. Melnea brushed the hair away from her face and 
saw Jawas scurry about preparing a meal. “Twopio, 
tell me more.” 


Raiders have since contented themselves with 
attacking a few colonists a year, and since the 
Human population claimed its share of Tuskens, 
peace (of a sort) reigned. 


A Growing World 


With the Sand People situation under control, 
Melnea’s full attention could now be turned to 
the mining of local ores. An evaporated sea bed 
east of Bestine, near the wreck of the Dowager 
Queen, was surveyed with promising results, and 
preparations for mining were begun in earnest. 

The planet's terrain, while not “fertile,” could 


still support enough crops to provide sustenance 
for the small population, leading to the establish- 
ment of the small towns of Anchorhead and 
Motesta; Fort Tusken was abandoned due to the 
harsh conditions of the area. 

The Republic miners established a new town 
on the sea bed itself, called Mos Eisley, around 
the site of the Dowager Queen’s remains. Not far 
from the boundaries of the new town, a power 
and water distribution plant was built, and the 
town prospered, despite its rough-and-tumble 
nature. 

Nuclear-powered steam vehicles dubbed crawl- 


Mos Eisley 


МУМ S N 


> 


RS Sy 
NN 


ers served as huge, mobile mining platforms. 
With the crawlers easing the excavation and 
smelting chores, Tatooine seemed well on its 
way to economic success. Mos Eisley grew in 
leaps and bounds, serving as the major space- 
port in addition to the center of mining. 

However, the colonists soon learned of another 
great danger of this desert world. It was learned 
that the huge sandstorms completely blinded 
starship sensors. Casting sand many kilometers 
intotheair, with storm fronts sometimes hundreds 
of kilometers long, a sandstorm could effectively 
cut off all settlements from contact for weeks. Ship 
sensors couldn't tell where the storm ended and 
the planet began, resulting in several crashes in a 
very short period of time. Worse, the storms could 
come up in a matter of minutes, giving almost no 
notice to the towns that lie in the path of these 
engines of destruction. 

Then, another disaster struck. Tatoo Ш, the 
brand new orbital station — designed to transfer 
cargo to and from those transports not capable 
of atmospheric flight — was destroyed. The first 
impulse was to blame the ship Obvious Nirvana, 
which was approaching for refueling at the time 
the disaster occurred. But the survivors who 
escaped in its lifeboat stuck to their story that, as 
the ship approached the station, there was an 
irresistible pull. The flight recorder verified that 
theship's engines were in full reverse. There was 
no immediate explanation for the disaster. 

In the final analysis, the culprit proved to be 
the metal used in the construction of the station, 
the majority of which had been manufactured on 
Tatooine. The ore, after refinement, seemed to 


Mos Eisley 


SESS 


SNS 
RS 


JSS 


randomly assume the properties of a magnet. 

Experiments were hurriedly performed, andit 
was found that this reaction was linked to the 
cycles of the twin suns; the means to fix the ore 
was determined, but it was prohibitively expen- 
sive. Competing sources could charge one-fifth 
the final price that the miners would have to 
impose. 

Tatooine's heyday was over. The mining cor- 
poration went bankrupt, and in a few short sea- 
sons the mines were all but abandoned. Although 
some miners left Tatooine, most of the support 
services, moisture farms, and most of the colo- 
nists themselves, remained. 

The majority of mining equipment was sold off 
(or, in the case of the crawlers, abandoned and 
then reclaimed by the Jawas), and Mos Eisley 
eventually grew over the top of the excavations. 


Life After The Mines 


"If there's a bright center to the universe, уои те 
on the planet that it's farthest from.” 


To say that Tatooine is far from the galactic 
mainstream is an understatement bordering on 
the ludicrous. While Tatooine is easy to get to, 
there are very few reasons to actually go there. 

As the mining industry collapsed, so did 
Tatooine's economy. Subsistence farming fed 
the population, and the sand provided some 
small revenue, but for the most part, the planet's 
trade was minimal. So far removed from the 
happenings of the galaxy was Tatooine that the 
passage from Republic to Empire was but a change 
of name to the local moisture farmers. 


Chapter One: Tatooine 


EE MÀ وو‎ 


John Paul Lona 


AR... 
ARST 


Chapter One: Tatooine 


Mos Eisley 


—DARL————————M Á/HÉe———— Chapter One: Tatooine 
"WA 


The End of an Era 


Prefect Orun Depp was toying with his breakfast 
when the officer appeared. He pushed around the 
contents of his plate, upon which was resting the 
remainder of his onethousand one-hundred and thirty- 
eighth breakfast of poached Krayt egg and leg of 
Sandhawk. He welcomed the interruption. “Yes?” 

Lieutenant Harburik controlled his impulseto sneer. 
*ComScan reports that a Star Destroyer and a small 
Corvette dropped out of hyperspace half an hour ago. 
There was some exchange of laser fire. Governor 
Aryon has asked you to handle the matter." 

The Prefect stood, hurriedly swallowing the re- 
maining bits of Krayt egg. "Well, now, that is news. 
Well, well. It's a good thing I — they'll have to parlay 
with me for the right to refuel, or whatever, right? 
Lieutenant, how much room is available in our jail?" 

Harburik sighed. "Sir, we have the Tonnika sisters; 
a Human was arrested for impersonating an Imperial 
officer; a Gamorrean is charged with beating a civil- 
ian; and a Rodian was caught pickpocketing." 

"Hmm. Better release the twins. I want to have 
enough room for —" 

"Sir, thetwins are by far the worst offenders of the 
lot!" 

“Lieutenant. An imperial Star Destroyer. Here. At 
Tatooine. Why, the implications of that are stagger- 
ing. Well, now ..." 

Harburik smiled to himself in anticipation of the 
reaction his next bit of news would have. "And, sir, 
they have just informed us they are sending down a 
detachment of stormtroopers." 

The Prefect stared at Harburik as if he had three 
heads, and then began spinning around the room, 
bumping into everything. Harburik had the vague 
urge to grab the man as if he were a spinning top. 

"Informed us? Not requested? What is the meaning 
of this? There are proper channels which must be 
followed, after all. Don't you agree, lieutenant? We 


will see about this." Depp broke off and strode out of 
the room. 

"Well, err, yes. Yes, sir," he repeated again for 
emphasis, inwardly gloating over the Prefect's dis- 
comfort as he followed the man through the building 
and into the control center. 

“Let me talk to that captain. How dare he think he 
cansimply send down troops without authorization." 

Harburik excused the communications officer and 
sat at the console himself, signaling the Destroyer. 
Depp furiously paced the small room as the lieuten- 
ant tapped a few last controls and gestured over to 
the hologram pod. *Here you are, sir." 

Depp stepped onto it, and as his image was being 
captured and transmitted to the Destroyer, a corre- 
sponding hologram formed in front of him. 

*Now, just what is the meaning of this?" Depp 
began, but cut himself short as a chill swept through 
the chamber. "Why, err..." 

The raven figure flickered. "I have no time for 
pleasantries, Prefect. I have ordered a detachment of 
troops down to Mos Eisley on official business —" 

Depp clutched at every last wisp of fleeing outrage 
and swallowed hard. “Yes, but the proper channels 
need to be followed, uh, Lord Vader.” He felt his 
resolve weakening. “Even one such as yourself, ur, 
understands the need for discipline in the ranks.” His 
resolve wavered for a moment, then collapsed. “Isn’t 
that right?” 

The holo image continued as if it had never been 
interrupted. “— by order of the Emperor. Expect two 
more Star Destroyers which shall constitute a quar- 
antine of Tatooine. Effective immediately. Is that 
clear, Prefect? 

“This, this is highly irregular ... but as you wish, 
Lord Vader.” The image faded, and Prefect Depp 
turned to Harburik, pulling on his collar. “Make ap- 
propriate accommodations for the soldiers, lieuten- 
ant. I want them to be served in every way possible.” 


However, Tatooine has in many ways recov- 
ered, but not through respectable industry. An 
up-and-coming crime lord known as Jabba the 
Hutt selected Tatooine to be the base of his 
organization. 

Jabba’s reasons for choosing Tatooineare clear. 
First, Tatooine is close to a major trade route, yet 
it is a world that is easily ignored. From Tatooine, 
itis easy to reach Alderaan and several minor trade 
worlds; from there, Imperial System (Coruscant), 
the Corellian System, and other major systems are 
easily accessible. On the other hand, there is no 
reason to venture to Tatooine — only a bunch of 
poor sand farmers. Jabba could be close to the 
action, yet remain virtually unnoticed. 


ne | 


Mos Eisley 


Second, Jabba was able to secure some means 
of security. No one knows how or why, but Jabba 
was able to bribe or frighten the old Imperial Moff 
into ignoring his activities. Over the years, new 
Moffs have come and gone, but all have been 
subservient to the crime lord for reasons un- 
known. 

As a result, Tatooine is technically under the 
domain of the Empire. However, it has had a 
string of ineffective and apathetic governors. 
The desert world has become a center of smug- 
gling and criminal activities, with the galaxy at 
large unaware. In short, Tatooine is a world that 
no one notices or cares about. 

Tatooine still lacks a unified central govern- 


Mike Vilardi 


hapter One: Tatooine 


ment: there is so much unclaimed territory that 
oneis unnecessary. Representatives of each town- 
ship meet as necessary to discuss matters of 
tradeand mutual defense. The Imperial governor 
issues decrees only as necessary to maintain the 
peace and collect taxes. As residents are fond of 
saying, "Tatooine isn't worth fighting over; it's a 
big hunk of nothing." 


The Economics of Sand 


Tatooine's economic picture seems univer- 
sally gloomy, at least in an analysis of official 
businesses. Tatooine is incapable of sustaining 
itself using planetary resources, with a trade 
imbalance that has yet to be adequately ad- 
dressed, at least officially. 


AR 
ARST 


Moisture Farming 


First, the moisture farmers are the very back- 
bone of the planet’s economy. Moisture farms 
cover almost ten percent of the planet’s surface: 
an incredible amount of land. It is a risky busi- 
ness and most farmers are barely getting by 
season after season. A few have managed to 
parlay their profits into larger and larger farms, 
but the vast majority continue to border on 
poverty. Water is one of Tatooine’s most pre- 
cious commodities. In addition to its value for 
drinking and other essential uses, the harvested 
water is pumped into huge subterranean pro- 
duce gardens. 


Processed Sands 


The sand offers a creative being a means to 
live. Processed sodium sand is used in several 
polymers and glues common in industrial con- 
struction. However, Tatooine faces competition 
from many other sodium sand-rich worlds, not to 
mention a dozen other substitutes. Therefore, 
the market value is always in flux — a shipment 
might only be worth half its original value once it 
reaches its destination. 


Tatooine Sand Castings 


Third, sand is used to create Tatooine sand 
castings. Always on the lookout for the unique, the 
upper stratum of Imperial society discovered the 
value of this handcrafted art as unique conversa- 
tion pieces. Unfortunately, the demand for this fad, 
now five years old, appears to be leveling off. 


The Crime Lord 


Jabba the Hutt’s criminal syndicate appears 
on no Imperial economic analysis, yet its mere 
presence sustains the entire planet’s economy. 
The Hutt indirectly employs a good percentage 
of Mos Eisley’s residents, and the government 
turns a blind eye to most of the Bloated One's 
revenue-producing exploits. 

The underworld itself traffics mostly in infor- 
mation, with smuggling illegal goods and infor- 
mation about smuggling illegal goods (both theirs 
and others’ operations), a close second. Mos 
Eisley's need to import most of its manufactured 
goods decreases official interest in the exact 
nature of a cargo. The situation encourages low- 
cost bribery and extortion as a way to move 
products smoothly. For whatever reason, the 
Imperial Moff of the sector has always made sure 
that Jabba can conduct his business undisturbed. 


Imperial Government 


The standard Imperial method of extracting 
subservience from client planets consists not so 
much of invasion as subversion. A token pres- 
ence is deposited, with the authority to shape 


Mos Eisley 


—S T A R Chapter One: Tatooine 
س‎ CCP One: Tatooine 


Governor Tour Aryon 
Template Type: Imperial Governor 
Loyalty: To the Empire 
Species: Human 
Homeworld: Treylon II 


Height: 1.6 meters 
Sex: Female 
Age: 37 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Blaster 4D+1, dodge 4D+2, melee combat 4D, melee 
combat (vibroblades) 5D+1, melee parry 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Alien species 4D, bureaucracy 5D+2, cultures 4D+2, 
planetary systems: Tatooine 5D, streetwise 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D 
Beast riding 4D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 6D+1, command 7D, con 5D, gambling 
5D+1, persuasion 5D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 1D+1 
Special Abilities: None 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 11 
Move: 9 
Description: A finely-featured woman with an ebony 
complexion, sporting the latest fashions. She is slight 
of build, yet exhibits an imposing presence. 
Background: Tour's contributions to Tatooine have 
been mainly cultural: Bestine has the only museum on 
the planet, with a complete Krayt Dragon skeleton. Her 
lavish parties and expensive imported entertainment 
have kept her busy, although her efforts have been lost 
on the moisture farmers and mechanics. She has little 
respect for the residents of Mos Eisley and considers 
them peasants and savages. 
Personality: Tour is sharp and quick-witted. She 
can size up a situation in 
moments, and react accord- 
ingly. She often assumes an 
airofageneralinspecting her 
troops. 
Objectives: Keep Tatooine 
quiet, and thus secure an 
eventual promotion (and re- 
location). 
Quote: “Sigh. I will not 
postpone my garden party 
simply because Talmont can- 
not deal with a small insur- 
rection. I will handle it to- 
morrow." 


Mos Eisley 


Kant Aryon 

Template Type: Retired Con Man 

Loyalty: To his wife 

Height: 1.7 meters 

Sex: Male 

Age: 32 

DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Blaster 5D+1, brawling parry 4D, dodge 6D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Cultures 4D, languages 4D, streetwise 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 4D+1, beast riding 3D+1, repulsorlift 

operation 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 4D, con 5D+1, gambling 6D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, Droid pro- 

gramming 4D+1, security 4D 

Force Sensitive?: Yes 

Force Points: 3 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 10 

Move: 10 

Description: A robust man of medium height and 
ebony complexion, dressed in the latest Imperial 
fashions. He looks like he used to smile a great deal. 

Background: The son of a baron and baroness, 
Kant grew up in the lap of luxury. He has concocted 
many elaborate swindles and soon learned that a 
great deal of money was available for the asking if he 
played along. He has served as an agent for the 
gangster underworld for many years. 

His love of con games is matched only by his love for 
Tour. They met eight years ago and were soon married. 
It was blind luck that landed the two here on Tatooine, 

so near Jabba the Hutt. 
Personality: Kant is no 
longer the happy-go-lucky 
gambler. He is aware that 
his career could jeopardize 
the only thing in his life he 
truly cares about: Tour. This 
has turned him into a re- 
cluse, and a somewhat 
jumpy, nervous fellow. 
Objectives: To keep sepa- 
rate his underworld busi- 
ness and his personal life. 
Quote: "I quite agree that 
the prefect can handle the 
disturbance, my dear. Here, 
let me prepare a whirlpool 
bath of Krayt egg salts." 


Species: Human 
Homeworld: Bethars 


11 


Illustration by Mike Vilardi 


and mold law; the threat of an Imperial crack- 
down is enough to elicit obedience. From this 
position of strength, the local customs and rules 
are often modified to better fit the Imperial penal 
and revenue codes. 

On Tatooine, this procedure fitted the needs 
of the Empire perfectly. Moff Julstan's appoint- 
ments have tended toward generating tax rev- 
enue and ignoring smuggling. To the average 
resident of Tatooine, the Empire was a long way 
away. 

Thecurrent governor of Tatooine, Tour Aryon, 
has taken even less of a hand in the daily affairs 
of her people. When first appointed, she moved 
her offices to an almost palatial house in Bestine, 
and appointed Orun Depp her Imperial Prefect, 
and charged him with running the day to day 
affairs of Tatooine. 

Aryon and Depp were under great pressue 
when the Empire turned its sights to the distant 
world in pursuit of two escaped Rebel Droids, but 
as the Imperial Fleet retreated, so things have 
gone back to normal. More stormtroopers have 
been garrisoned on the world, but they don't 
answer directly to the government, providing a 
convenient time lag for those, like Jabba, who 
benefit from unorganized military efforts. As a 
result, the extra troops are still unable to stifle 
smuggling — perhaps the desired result of some- 
one higher up in the Imperial chain of command. 

After Depp'sratherunfortunate demise, Aryon 


Chapter One: Tatooine a———  ' ——————————————— WA a 


ARS 


appointed Eugene Talmont as her new Prefect, 
advising him to keep a lower profile than his 
predecessor. 


How The Government Affects 
The Average Person 


As said before, to the average person who lives 
on Tatooine, the Empire is a very long way away. 
Unless one happens to be in the wrong place at the 
wrong time, the Empire's military forces are sel- 
dom encountered, and people don't see much of 
the militia or the police either. People, especially in 
the isolated farming communities, are expected to 
take care of themselves. Because virtually every- 
one has some kind of weapon and homesteads are 
so scattered, there is a great amount of respect 
between neighbors — few people will ever rely on 
the courts when simple negotiation can solve most 
disputes. 

There are moderate sales, income and prop- 
erty taxes that everyone complains about but no 
one seems inclined to actually protest. Town- 
ships are self-governing, doing what they will 
with their own tax revenues — often little more 
than buying a few spare power generators or 
repairing something that was destroyed in one of 
the massive sandstorms. Each town also issues 
its own IDs to all citizens, although they all con- 
tain the same information: name, age, nearest 
relatives, occupation and address. 


Mos Eisley 


—DARL—————————— CNAE One: Tatooine 
a ے———.—_—k—ک—ک ت‎ 


"WA 


Tatooines Geography 


Thecourseofthe characters' adventures may take 
them to some of the distant townships and locations 
of Tatooine. Some of the most likely destinations are 
described below. 

Anchorhead: Several hundred kilometers south- 
west of Mos Eisley, this farming hamlet has a popula- 
tion of only 700. The town itself only has a small 
cluster of buildings, including a transport station, a 
restaurant and other elementary services, but it serves 
a large community of moisture farmers. It is effec- 
tively cut off from Mos Eisley by the the Jundland 
Wastes. It is linked to Mos Eisley by regular transport 
service. 

Arnthout: A small farming community south of 
Bestine, with a population of about 350. 

Bestine: The official capital of Tatooine, Bestine is 
asmall town about 200 kilometers to the west of Mos 
Eisley. Home to about one thousand permanent resi- 
dents, Bestine has the only museum on Tatooine and 
little else. 

Dune Sea: A vast desert expanse, stretching for 
thousands of kilometers, known for unbearably hot 
days and frigid nights. The Western Dune Sea borders 
on the Jundland Wastes. 

Fort Tusken: An abandoned settlement far along 
the northern reaches of the Jundland Wastes. It was 


Mos Eisley 


the site of the first conflict between Human settlers 
and the Sand People, or Tusken Raiders. 

Great Pit of Carkoon: A huge pit in the heart of the 
Dune Sea, home to the infamous Sarlacc monster. 

Jabba the Hutt's Palace: Located thousands of kilo- 
meters from Mos Eisley, in a small range of hills within 
theDune Sea, the Palace is wherethe infamous gangster 
holds court. Isolated from civilization, people seldom 
arrive at the palace unless they are wanted by Jabba. 

Jundland Wastes: A rough, dry canyon, mountain 
and mesa area, known to be nearly impassible except 
for the narrow Arnthout Pass. Known to be populated 
by Tusken Raiders, Krayt Dragons and many other 
dangerous creatures. The area runs along the West- 
ern Dune Sea, with a major branch cutting off 
Anchorhead and Mos Eisley. 

Mos Eisley: The center of civilization on Tatooine, 
Mos Eisley is a major spaceport and is a prominent 
base for smugglers and criminals. 

Motesta: A small farming hamlet in Arnthout Pass. 

Tosche Station: A power, water and refueling de- 
pot about three kilometers due south of Anchorhead. 
The Tosche family is well respected by farmers in the 
Anchorhead region. 


Besine ^. ER 
^o 29. й 
Arnthout um 


Abandoned 
. Mine , 
UR 


Mos Eisley 


e. 


Jundland Waste 


at 
€ Motesta 1 
RL 


\ 


f 
N 
= 


` „Anchorhead 


John Paul Lona 


13 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview AR— 
—— CARS 


Ell Chapter Two 


Mos Eisley Overview 


Mos Eisley is the only major civilized area on 
the vast desert planet of Tatooine, yet it is a 
dangerous, dirty and uncivilized port city, at 
least compared to the sprawling centers of trade 
inthe Core Worlds. The pirate city offers much to 
the daring and enterprising, but the meek should 
definitely stay in the farm towns. 

The average population of Mos Eisley is about 
50,000-60,000 beings. This estimate increases 
when the local harvests come in, decreases when 
the economy of the sector sags, and increases 
(slightly) with tourism during Tatooine’s “cool” 
season. Most transients live in Mos Eisley since 
there is little else on the planet. 

The mix of species here is reminiscent of the 
Old Republic — a time when each species’ indi- 
vidual viewpoint and contributions were prized 


instead of belittled. Of course, the fact that there 
are potential fortunes to be made encourages 
people to be a little bit more accepting as well. 


Getting In... 


Approaching Mos Eisley from space, the city is 
unremarkable. Situated in a sprawling valley to 
the north of the Jundland Wastes, the city liter- 
ally simmers with the constant heat of the twin 
suns and the motion of its many inhabitants. 

For acomplete overview of the standard land- 
ing procedure, see location 23, “Spaceport Con- 
trol Tower.” In general, unless aship’s pilot makes 
a stupid statement (such as “We’re smugglers,” 
or “We're here on business from the Rebellion.”), 
most ships are ushered into the city without any 


Mos Eisley 


—S T A т Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


-WA 


serious scrutiny. If a ship is identified as being in 
the employ of one of the local corporations the 
ship is virtually guaranteed to be allowed to land 
without hesitation. 


Customs 


Ostensibly, the customs office is supposed to 
prevent the smuggling of illegal goods and guar- 
antee that all products are properly taxed. In 
practice, customs officials spend more time col- 
lecting bribes than confiscating goods. 

Corporate docking bays are not subject to 
customs inspections in Mos Eisley. Instead, the 
companies each submit a seasonal list of incom- 
ing freight, upon which they pay two percent 
duties. This system is rife with deceit, but the city 
administration is understaffed and uncaring. 

Using a privately-owned docking bay means a 
ship may be visited by a customs inspector, 
although the process has evolved into a tradition 
of nearsightedness. Free traders who visit the 
spaceport are required to fill out a cargo mani- 
fest and transmit it to the docking bay's owners, 
who then have a week to file it with the spaceport 
control tower. Regulars have become adept at 
creative writing, offering such diverting prose as 
“socio-economic technical adjusters” when de- 
scribing a shipment of blasters. 

Physical inspections of incoming cargo are 
infrequent. If a ship does manage to get inspected 
(only about one in 500 ships are so honored), the 
inspector usually expects 100 credits or so to 


— m 


Mos Eisley 


overlook any minor infractions; unless a smug- 
gler is on Jabba's payroll, bribes for serious 
crimes, like spice smuggling or gun running, can 
be much higher. The inspectors don't expect an 
elaborate ruse, high-quality roleplaying or asong 
and dance to convince them that the smugglers 
are honest, happy-go-lucky tourists; they simply 
want their credits and they will go away. 

Attempting to coerce or intimidate a customs 
official is a bad thing, and is one of the few things 
in this city that will summon police officers or 
stormtroopers, normally within a few minutes. 
The officials wear headset comlinks hard-coded 
to the spaceport control tower and police head- 
quarters. Customs officials in Mos Eisley are out 
for themselves. If Jabba wants a particular ship 
impounded, and he is willing to pay a thousand or 
so credits for the privilege, no one at customs will 
refuse him. Of course, if someone blows a whistle 
on one of the Hutt’s shipments, Jabba can easily 
buy the officials’ ignorance. 


Customs Inspector: Putten Beatus 
Species: Near-Human 

Sex: Female 

Age: 29 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Dodge 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

Alien species 3D, bureaucracy 5D, lan- 
guages 4D+2, law enforcement 5D+1, 
streetwise 2D+2, value 2D 


Р 
Ё 
® 
2 
= 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview mm 1 JA a 
ARS 


Finding Work 


"Is it watching us?" 

*What? Is what watching us?” 

*That Jawa over there — don't turn! Looks like it's 
got a comlink. It may be the same one who has been 
following us since we landed here this morning.” 
Vareth's brows furrowed in concentration over her 
fozbeer. It was bad enough that they had forged ship 
credentials, but they lacked time or money to even try 
and get their own ID's changed. And they certainly 
had no legitimate business in this city. Now she 
wished she hadn't let Garron talk her into this. Pull a 
job for a gangster like the Hutt? She almost shud- 
dered. But it was the only way to turn a quick credit. 
And it wasn't like they were preparing to engage in 
robbery or theft. Not really. 

She glanced at her companion. At least Garron 
looked pretty calm. But it was difficult to tell with a 
Sullustan. 

“How is it | am to tell you if he is watching or not, 
shall I?" asked Garron. 

“Sigh. I don't know. I guess you can't. I wish we had 
an electronic scanner, or some kind of Droid eaves- 
dropper. Or maybe —" 

Garron cut her off. “Yawn.” 

*Pardon me?" asked Vareth, watching the Jawa out 
of the corner of her eye. 

“Yawn, yes. Trust me." 

Garron smiled. That was their personal signal, and 
their private joke. No one should ever trust a smug- 
gler. “Okay.” 

Vareth did what she hoped was a good imitation of 
a yawn. She saw Garron's own jaw muscles clench 
until he finally succumbed to the overwhelming urge. 
And as she watched, the suspected spy turned away 
and put its hand to its mouth. Vareth grinned and 
momentarily considered the universality of the yawn 
reflex. 

*Good idea, Garron. Let's go." The two stood and 
swiftly left the cantina. Their exit was noted. 

Theglareofthesuns onthe sand made Vareth want 
to turn back to the dim coolness of the bar. She 
glanced at Garron, who had already placed goggles 
over his sensitive eyes. 

*How do we find his place? This whole area is a 
maze. Wewent in to get directions, but nobody seemed 
to know." 

*Perhaps perchance it is not we who need to find 
them; the other ones must find us?" 

*Yeah, maybe. Let's keep moving, though. I don't 
wantto give anybody timeto get a bead on us." Vareth 
put her scarf up to her nose as they passed a group of 


16 


Jawas. At least she had learned this much about 
Tatooine. 

"Excuse me," spoke a metallic voice. Vareth froze. 
It sounded like a stormtrooper. She turned slowly 
around. She blinked once, then twice. There was no 
one there. 

“Excuse me,” the voice said again, from somewhere 
near her waist. Vareth looked down to see the Jawa 
holding a hand translator to its throat. "I have greet- 
ings from your employer. Please follow me." 

*See what I have been telling is true now, yes?" 

*Shutup, Garron." They followed the brown-cloaked 
figure as it weaved through the crowds, avoided a 
speeding landspeeder, and ducked into a dim door- 
way. Vareth easily kept stride with the creature as it 
sped down the cool dark tunnel, past passageways 
and side tunnels, first taking a left, then a right, 
skipping several doors, turning another corner, and 
finally stopping at a closed door. It muttered some- 
thing Vareth was sure would have been incomprehen- 
sible even if she had heard it clearly. The door slid 
open with a scraping sound of steel against sand. 

The room was dimly lit by a portable generator 
sitting on the floor. The earthy smell invading her 
nostrils was produced by the enormous number of 
mushrooms and other fungi covering the floor and 
walls. The only furniture in the room was a chair 
occupied by a pasty-looking Twi'lek, his head tails 
draped around his shoulders. The Twi'lek swallowed 
thelastof his mushroom and licked his fingers. Vareth 
heard Garron enter the room behind her, and the door 
shut. This Twi'lek was egotistical indeed, to feel safe 
against two free-traders. Then again, Vareth reminded 
herself, they were here at his disposalto gain employ- 
ment. Still, showing any fear would likely not get them 
the job. 

“Yes,” the sitting being said, his left head tail twitch- 
ing, *you have been watched since you entered the 
system. And if you were to injure me, it is unlikely you 
could find your way back out of this maze." 

Vareth straightened upto her full height. "Of course. 
Except my friend here," she stepped to the left to let 
the Twi'lek get a good view of Garron, "is a Sullustan. 
When it comes to tunnels they have a photographic 
memory. Shall we try this again?" She stepped for- 
ward. "My name is Vareth." 

“Greetings, sly one. | am Bib Fortuna." He paused 
for a moment to let the announcement sink in, as if it 
were some great pronouncement. Because of the way 
the Twi'lek carried himself, Vareth had an itching 
notion to kneel, but ignored it. Fortuna cleared his 
throat. "You appear adequate to the task." 


а 


Mos Eisley 


«ЎТА ۹ Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


"WA 


MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift operation 4D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 6D+1, con 5D, gambling 4D, 

search 6D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Security 3D, space transports repair 4D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 6 

Equipment: Headset comlink, blaster pistol 
(4D damage), datapad 

Description: A pale near-Human oí indeter- 
minable heritage, Putten's gray skin and large 
ears have attracted quite a few stares over the 
years. 

Background: Putten has always been an out- 
cast. Eventually, she wound up in Mos Eisley, and 
decided to take up residence and find a job here. 

Personality: Gruff, demanding and abrasive. 
She does have a few close friends; everyone else 
is greeted with boundless hostility. 

Objectives: To be obnoxious and demanding 
up to the very limit of her target's patience. 

A Quote: "Sure you're a tourist — you're not 
fooling me, so give me another 50 credits. Hurry 
up so I can get out of here." 


Other Options 


Those whoareoverly-sensitive about the pros- 
pect of being searched can always try a desert 
landing. Whilethis normally isn't too hard, it isn't 
very safe either. Thereis a very good chancethat 
a ship out in the desert will get attacked by 
Tusken Raiders, torn apart by Krayt Dragons, 
dismantled by Jawas or simply blown away by 
the sudden and devastating sandstorms. There 
are a few private estates outside the city proper 
that might offer landing space. 

Entering Mos Eisley on foot or by vehicle is 
nothing unusual — this is how most moisture 
farmers and Jawas reach the area. There are 
daily transports to other towns on the planet, 
such as Bestine, Motesta, or Anchorhead (with 
its famous “circle-route” around the Jundland 
Wastes which has been romanticized in popular 
songs). Trips from other towns on or near the 
Dune Sea require chartering a transport. 


... Getting Out 


It is always easier to get onto Tatooine than to 
leave. Pilots with legal documentation and unre- 
markable cargoes should have no trouble. The 
typical Mos Eisley freighter, however, has nei- 
ther. Freighters and scouts who arrive empty 
and prepare to leave apparently still empty are 


Mos Eisley 


expected to grease the servomotors before de- 
parture to prevent a sudden search. Delay also 
holds the captain liable for rental of the docking 
bay for as long as the ship is forced to remain. 

It is possible to simply leave without authori- 
zation. The reaction in such cases depends upon 
circumstances — if the bay is company-owned, it 
is likely to take a dim view of such hasty good- 
byes. This unhappiness often manifests itself in 
themanner of dispatching corporate starfighters, 
in hopes of persuading the offender to return and 
say a proper good-bye. 

Privately owned docking bays rarely have such 
options available. Instead, all information about 
the offender is transmitted to the authorities. On 
the off chance an Imperial cruiser is in orbit, has 
the time, and the captain is cooperative, the 
delinquent vessel might find itself outmatched. 
Onrare occasions traffic control's antique cloud 


3 
z 
> 
Е 
ž 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview m fA Rosen 
—— ware 


First Impressions 


The speeder inched its way slowly along the crooked 
streets. Dozens of disreputable-looking beings meandered 
through the maze, oblivious to the shiny speeder with the 
Imperial emblem. The place was hot, the buildings huddled 
close to the ground. Every so often a narrow alley offered 
shadows strung along its length, but the twin suns made 
sure that the shadows provided no relief from the heat. Or 
the smell. 

*It's not much to look at, is it?" sighed Prefect Eugene 
Talmont, tugging open the collar of his uniform. 

Lieutenant Harburik looked up from the instrument 
panel. “No, sir.” The soldier quickly weaved around a 
cluster of Jawas. The brown-cloaked creatures scuttled 
alongside the speeder for a few meters, stroking the hood 
and jabbering at each other. The Prefect noticed a few flies 
buzzing about the hoods of the short creatures and in- 
stinctively recoiled. He turned around to watch them as 
the speeder eventually outpaced them and the small be- 
ings receded into the distance. 

"Hmph. If this is the greatest settlement on the planet, 
Га say that my stationing here will be a waste of my 
considerable talent. You'd think old Moff Julstan could 
find someplace more deserving of my skills as a negotiator: 
my learned finesse." 

“Yes, sir. It's true that nothing much happens here." 
Harburik had met the man only five minutes ago and 
already detested him. He decided to let the Prefect find out 
for himself just how much activity was seething under the 
surface of this docile-looking city. Perhaps that would 
learn some of the smugness out of him. 

*By the way, what do you know about why the old 
Prefect was removed from his post? I had heard of his 
generalincompetence and idiosyncrasies — imagine wast- 
ing Imperial revenue on producing thousands of local 
maps to hand out free to visitors — but loosing general 
incompetence onto this backwater planet seems harmless 
enough." 

*Prefect Depp was killed in the line of action, sir.” 

*On this planet?" Prefect Talmont shifted uncomfort- 
ably in his seat. "Surely not a local uprising?" 

"The report was a little vague, sir," Harburik said, in his 
most infuriating drawl, enjoying the Prefect's discomfort. 
"Something about an assassin Droid, as I recall." 

"Oh. Oh ... my." Talmont blanched and sat back. "Shall 
we put the canopy roof up? Yes, the canopy, I think. We had 
better review the current police deployment once we 
reach my office. Oh, my." 

The lieutenant smiled as he directed the speeder to- 
ward the Prefect's new office. 


car tugs are dispatched (it is even rarer for them 
to succeed in waylaying a ship). Most often the 
complaint is simply filed, and passed on to all 
databases controlling access to bays on the 
planet. 

Should Tatooine be placed under quarantine 


(such a thing has happened only once in modern 
history), the presence of Imperial Dreadnaught 
Cruisers (or larger ships) should dissuade any 
but the most foolhardy or courageous from at- 
tempting to run a blockade. 

Launching from outside a civilized area — the 
middle of the Jundland Wastes, for example — is 
usually performed without incident ... as long as 
the ship has not been buried by sandstorms or 
dismantled by Jawas by the time you return to it. 


The City 


From a distance, much'of Mos Eisley blends 
into the desert. Sand-colored mounds disappear 
among the wavy currents of heat rising from the 
sunbaked land. Closer inspection, however, be- 
gins to reveal definition and purpose. Low grade 
concrete, stone and plastoid mounds spread out 
from power and water distribution plants like 
disease on a Gundark's wing. As form follows 
function, these buildings have curves and domed 
roofs to support the weight of the sand and to 
passively minimize dune buildup. Resistance to 
sandstorms is greatly improved by a subterra- 
nean emphasis. The domes also help reduce the 
size of mysterious mists which rise regularly 
from the ground at the points where desert sands 
wash up against unyielding cliffs and mesas, 
encumbering travelers with obscuring fog. 

Although traditional Mos Eisley construction 
is underground, with perhaps one or two stories 
poking their heads out of the sand into the in- 
tense heat of the suns, some of the newer build- 
ings, mostly commercial, are four or five stories 
high. Pourstone walls mask durasteel double 
walls with circulating coolant flowing freely be- 
tween. This enables multi-story construction 
above ground and circumvents the problems of 
shifting sands during construction of the tradi- 
tional two- or three-story pits. Virtually all build- 
ing entrances are equipped with electrostatic 
repellors (in varying degrees of repair) called 
sand traps, designed to keep entrances clear of 
the drifting sands. 

Mos Eisley has never been a community fix- 
ated on urban planning. In this city, family houses 
are built next to landing bays and across the 
street from heavy manufacturing factories. In 
short, the city is a hodge-podge of construction, 
with few true neighborhoods. Adding to the con- 
fusion is the fact that none of the streets have 
been surfaced or even named — directions are 
given by businesses and landmarks instead of 
street crossings. It's assumed that if someone 
wants to go somewhere they'll know how to find 
it. 

At the heart of the city are the original space- 
port docking bays, along with the power and 
water distribution plants that supply the city's 


Mos Eisley 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


Mos Eisley 19 


hapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


core buildings. The spaceport control tower is 
located here. Due to Mos Eisley's typical lack of 
initiative and funds, the collection and distribu- 
tion water and power network still does not 
reach the majority of the city. This means that 
moisture vaporators, seen by the hundreds out 
on Tatooine's omnipresent moisture farms, can 
also be found tucked into numerous corners and 
alleys. 

This area is also over the site of the old ore 
mine and the ground is pocketed with shifting 
and unstable sands. There are minor sinkholes 
which appear and disappear at the slightest sand- 
storm. 

There are many factories to the north of the 
city, including Notsub Shipping, Tatooine's larg- 
est company. Other industries include limited 
goods manufacturing (from the specially treated 
ores), including Droids, landspeeders and sand 
skiffs. 


The Underground 


The wholly unregulated part of the city lies 
beneath Mos Eisley. The abandoned mines and 
excavations left by the original settlers remain 
hidden far below the surface. Some corporations 
usethe shafts, crevices, and dead-ends as dump- 
ing areas for contraband goods or toxic waste, 
for discreet agro farming, or for illegal opera- 
tions. Jabba's cronies usethe tunnels as a means 
to enter and leave the city without being ob- 
served, and as rent-free warehouses. 

Thelmperial government, of course, has some 


knowledge of the existence of these tunnels, but 
no real hint how extensive they are. The new 
Prefect has neither the interest, the time, nor the 
personnel to even begin charting a piece of the 
city which (so far) has not caused him any prob- 
lems. 

Jabba's operatives, on the other hand, have 
mapped out more of the caverns than all the 
corporations put together. But this actually means 
that no morethan a fifth ofthe caverns have been 
explored ... 


Mos Eisleys Government 


Mos Eisley is run solely by the dictates of the 
Imperial Prefect, who has all of his decrees ap- 
proved by the planetary governor. This system 
allows the most direct and effective method of 
bribery and intimidation. Jabba the Hutt has 
found much influence with Prefect Talmont's 
government by bribing most of his main advi- 
sors. 


Law Enforcement 
(Or The Lack Thereof) 

Mos Eisley has a limited police force, newly 
created through the governor's edict. Some of 
these officers are former militia members, and 
now get paid a better salary for the same duties 
they were already performing. Only now, they 
work at it full-time and have spiffy new uniforms 
and vehicles. Although the police force is small, 
the city still relies upon remaining available mem- 
bers of the local militia (both current and re- 
tired) for any real trouble. 


Mos Eisley 


«ТАБ Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


Ig Chapter Two; Mos Eisley Overview 


Most businesses employ private security 
guards. And those that do not are relatively new, 
haveother means of protection, have little worth 
taking, or quickly find the guards' employment 
well worth the expense. 

It is commonly believed that the location of 
Jabba's Townhouse in the city deters criminals 
from indiscriminately plying their trade. This is 
true, but only because Jabba himself hands out 
neighborhood “licenses” for various gangs and 
hoods. They help reinforce his will, insure prompt 
payment of protection money (for those few 
businesses Jabba feels can afford to pay—he has 
no desire, so to speak, to lay Bantha fodder in his 
own backyard), and keep an eye out for informa- 
tion. After all, the Kubaz known as Garindan (Mos 
Eisley’s premiere spy, recently added to Jabba’s 
full-time payroll) can’t be everywhere at once. 

All these factors combine to make the city a 
relaxing place for Jabba and his cronies. No one 
can cause trouble without Jabba hearing of it, 
either through reports by security guards or by 
his many, many eyes on the streets. This suits 
Jabba fine, but makes newcomers very nervous. 


Crime & Punishment 


Mos Eisley takes a rather leisurely attitude 
toward crime. Law and order is more of a sugges- 
tion than a policy. As a result, the courts empha- 
size localized conditions, welcome attempts at 
bribery and political influence, and plaintiffs ac- 
tually expect extremes in style and degree of 
chastisements. The specifics depend upon who 
the victim is, who the perpetrator is, and where 
the crime occurred. 

A crime deemed by a judge to be directed 
against the Empire or the general welfare of its 
citizens (a term designed to be as vague as pos- 
sible) typically causes the defendant to receivea 
strict sentence. However, this claim is normally 
only levied against non-Tatooine residents who 
commit offenses against natives; crime commit- 
ted by a full-time resident against another is 
likely to be treated as a minor crime. 

It is generally difficult to get arrested in Mos 
Eisley for those who possess a modicum of self 
restraint and common sense. Minor infractions 
are often overlooked: this is a place where beings 
from all across the galaxy meet, mix, and do 
business. It is unlikely that all who visit have a 
grasp of local customs and laws. The police are 
aware that the traders expect more tolerance 
here in the Outer Rim Territories than in the Core 
Worlds. Besides, a city which permits its citizens 
to openly carry small arms is obviously not going 
to employ a trigger-happy squad of constables. 

However, once in trouble, things can get seri- 
ous very quickly for outsiders. A lawyer experi- 
enced in both Tatooine and Imperial law is al- 


Mos Eisley 


mosta requirement ifthe defendants are to stand 
a chance of avoiding a slave gang. 


Infractions and Consequences 


The most serious infractions committed in 
Mos Eisley (and which are brought to trial) are as 
follows, identified by the Imperial Penal Refer- 
ence. Local Tatooine laws which are on the books 
— but not necessarily enforced — are indicated 
by parentheses. While the punishments for these 
crimes are clustered on the low end of the indi- 
cated consequences, and often include attempted 
rehabilitation, they are listed here for easy com- 
parison of severity. 


Class One Infraction 


* Conspiracy to overthrow the Empire 
* Treason against the Empire 
* Attack on a ship 
* Aggression against a member of the Imperial 
Armed Forces 

Consequences: Arrest, five to 30 standard 
years in a penal colony, loss of business or pilot 
license, possible execution. 


Class Two Infraction 


* Shipment of high-energy weapons without a 
permit 
* Purchase or transportation of stolen goods 
* Possession, purchase or transportation of ille- 
gal or restricted items 
* (Murder or manslaughter) 
* (Fraud or embezzlement against the govern- 
ment or an individual) 
* (Aggression against a member of Mos Fisley's 
police or militia forces) 

Consequences: Arrest, fined upto 10,000 cred- 
its, fiveto 30 standard years in jail, probable loss 
of business or pilot license. 


Class Three Infraction 


* Attempted bribery of an Imperial official 

* (Grand theft landspeeder) 

* (Aiding and abetting a known felon) 
Consequences: Arrest, fined 250 to 5,000 cred- 

its, and/or up to two standard years in jail, pos- 

sible loss of business or pilot license. 


Class Four Infraction 


* Purchase or transportation of any narcotic 
without a permit 

* Purchase or transportation of any goods re- 
quiring a permit, with said lacking 

* Purchase or use of any vessel or vehicle while 
lacking an operating license 

* Possession, purchase or transportation of un- 
restricted items in quantity without proper taxa- 
tion 

* (Attempted or achieved transportation off 
planet of manufactured goods containing 


€ 
5 
2 
5 
5 
< 


Tatooine оге) 
* (Assault) 

Consequences: Arrest, fined 175 to 5,000 cred- 
its, and/or up to one standard month in jail 


Class Five Infraction 
* Lack of proper emergency equipment for any 
vessel or vehicle (including escape pods) 
* (Public drunkenness, lewd behavior, violent 
behavior) 
Consequences: Fined 100 to 5,000 credits 


Stormtroopers 
There is currently a detachment of about 20 
stormtroopers in Mos Eisley, deposited here af- 
ter an unfortunate incident involving a pair of 
Droids and their young owner from Anchorhead. 
The stormtroopers are assigned to the gover- 


hapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview — Ó—ÓÓ—áÁ—9Má—"— | FA Rose 


ARS 


nor, but they aren't under her direct command. 
They areanswerable directly to Imperial military 
officials — off-planet and very far away. As a 
result, they generally determine for themselves 
what tasks they are supposed to accomplish and 
what they can chooseto avoid. They accompany 
Governor Aryon and her husband on their trips 
"into the country" or to Mos Eisley, and perform 
law enforcement duties that the police and mili- 
tia can't handle on their own. 

Some say the arrangement makes good mili- 
tarysense:the Imperial presence requires a force 
which can react without emotional ties to those 
it is subjugating. Others suggest that posting 
someone here is punishment for incompetence. 

The garrison has full access to all equipment 
possessed by the police force. They also maintain 
a fleet of military speeder bikes for their own use. 

One would suspect that this group of 
stormtroopers would crack down on smuggling. 
In fact, if they knew the extent of what was going 
on, they would attempt a crackdown. However, 
thelocal government doesn'ttalkabout the smug- 
gling (since most of the officials would end up 
executed for corruption and bribery). Jabba's 
contacts, both in the local government and with 
the sector Moff, enables him to keep a close 
watch on the activities of the troopers and pro- 
tect his operatives — making any smuggling ac- 
tivities that are discovered appear to be small, 
localized organizations. 


Typical Tatooine Stormtrooper 
Template Type: Desert Terrain 
Stormtrooper 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, blaster: blaster rifle 5D, 
brawling parry 4D, dodge 3D+2, melee 
combat 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Bureaucracy 2D+1, intimidation 3D+2, law 
enforcement 3D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Repulsorlift operation 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Search 2D+2 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 4D+1 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 0-5 
Equipment: Heat-reflective armor (+10 from 
energy, +2D from physicalattacks; +1Dto Strength, 
-1D to Dexterity), comlink, filtermask, blaster rifle 
(5D damage, 3-30/100/300), blaster pistol (4D 
damage, 3-10/30/120) 

A Quote: “Let me see your identification.” 


Mos Eisley 


STA 
"WA 


Speeder Bike 

Craft: Aratech 74-Z Military Speeder Bike 

Type: Speeder bike 

Scale: Speeder 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: speeder bike 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: none 

Cover: 1/4 

Cargo Capacity: 3 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level - 5 meters 

Cost: 7,000 credits 

Move: 140; 400 KMH 

Maneuverability: 3D+2 

Body Strength: 2D 

Weapons: 

Laser Cannon 
Fire Control: 2D 
Damage: 3D 

Speeder bikes sacrifice altitude for speed, and 
the 74-Z is no exception. This particular brand of 
bike is mass-produced for the ever-growing Im- 
perial war machine, and the bikes have even 
reached the desert world of Tatooine. Here, they 
are officially restricted to law enforcement per- 
sonnel. Realistically, only stormtroopers have 
access to the bikes. They are considered undig- 
nified transportation by many local officials, while 
the stormtroopers consider them excellent craft 
for the desert terrain. 


Police Deployment 

The police patrolon foot, scooter and Dewback 
(see location 10, *Dewback Stables" for statis- 
tics). 

The police use the scooters because they can 
chase offenders more effectively, and the scoot- 
erscan cover more ground. The eight scooters in 
the possession of the Mos Eisley force are kept in 
good condition via an extensive maintenance 
routine conducted at the police station garage. 

The police use Dewback beasts only rarely, 
when scooters aren't available and there is more 
territory to be patrolled than a foot patrol can 
cover. 

The chief of police, Lieutenant Harburik, re- 
ports directly to Prefect Talmont. He is unhappy 
with this arrangement, correctly identifying 
Talmont as an ineffective leader and lazy bureau- 
crat. However, his military background almost 
assures that he will blindly follow any imposed 
procedures. It has not yet occurred to him that 
his police force outnumbers the Imperial pres- 
ence. It has occurred to him, however, that the 
Empire could easily reduce the planet to slag. 

Typical Mos Eisley Police Officer 

Template Type: Police Officer 


DEXTERITY 3D+1 
Blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D+2, melee combat 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


4D+1 


KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Languages 3D+1, law enforcement 5D+2, 
streetwise 4D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift operation 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Search 2D+2, sneak 2D+1 

STRENGTH 4D 

Brawling 4D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Security 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-5 

Equipment: Protective desert clothing, 


comlink, filtermask, riot armor («1D from energy 
attacks), blaster pistol (4D damage, 3-10/30/120), 


Mos Eisley 


23 


John Paul Lona 


hapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


———ТА н. 


ARS 


Prefect Eugene Talmont background and unsmeared reputa- 


Template Type: Imperial Prefect 


DEXTERITY 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 


Bureaucracy 6D+1, languages 4D+2, law 


enforcement 3D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 

Beast riding 5D 
PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+2, command 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 3D 

Force Sensitive?: No 


Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 2 


tion led him from one boring post to 
another. Talmont was never very 
thrilled about the post at Mos Eisley 
— once he learned that the old Pre- 
fect, Orun Depp, had been killed by an 
assassin Droid, he went from apathetic 
to fearful. Now Eugene makes do, hop- 
ing for a transfer from this hideous 
world. 


Personality: Eugene is full of himself 
and misjudges his importance. The 
Prefect is nearsighted, but is too vain 
to wear corrective lenses. He is impa- 
tientwith his subordinates whentense, 
but otherwise treats them well. 


Description: A slight-built wiry man of | Objectives: To increase his prestige 
medium height, he has an obvioustou- while avoiding Governor Tour Aryon. 


pee. 


A Quote: “I see! They think they can 


Background: Born and bred to serve get away with it, but they have yet to 
the Empire, Eugene's unremarkable deal with Prefect Talmont!” 


force pike (4D damage). 
A Quote: “All right, break it up. Both of you get 
out of here and I won’t report this. Again.” 


Dewback 
DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 4D+1 
Orneriness: 3D 
Move: 35; 100 KMH (during day)/ 7; 20 
KMH (at night) 


Size: 2.1 meters at the shoulder 

These lizards are huge omnivores native to 
Tatooine. Active during the heat of the day, they 
become docile and sluggish at night. The police 
utilize these animals when patrolling outside the 
city proper. They are less likely to be affected by 
sandstorms than are landspeeders, usually ig- 
noring the storm’s effects as they stride to their 
destination. When Dewbacks eat meat, their usual 
prey is Womp Rat-size or smaller. 


Mos Eisley 


ЯТА M '/"J"/—— Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


"WA 


Lieutenant Harburik 


DEXTERITY 4D+1 

Blaster 6D+1, brawling parry 4D+1, 
dodge 6D+2, grenade 4D+2, melee 
combat 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 3D, repulsorlift opera- 
tion 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Gambling 6D, search 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, 
demolition 4D+2, security 5D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 6 


Equipment: Armored blast vest («1D 
to front from both physical and en- 
ergy attacks), heavy blaster pistol 
(5D damage, 3-7/25/50), comlink, ho- 
lographic imager, macrobinoculars. 


Description: A large, well-muscled 
man. He would be devastatingly 


handsome except for the vicious look in 
his eyes. 


Background: Harburik represents every- 
thingthat is reprehensible about the New 
Order. Harburik originally resented being 
posted as personal liaison to the Prefect, 
especially as he had to assume the dead 
Prefect's responsibilities while Mos Eisley 
waited for a replacement. He soon real- 
ized that the power vacuum could be 
turned to his advantage and now enjoys 
his new position as Chief of Police. He 
likes being a large fish in a small pond. His 
biggest problem is Prefect Talmont's 
pompous and overbearing demeanor. He 
has not yet decided how to go about 
replacing the man with someone more 
capable, but a trend of Prefects being 
killed by assassin Droids is appealing. 


Personality: Crass, rude, and cruel are the anchor points 
of Harburik’s personality. He is well known for abusing 
every subordinate who comes into contact with him. 


Objectives: To keep his power base from transferring to 
Prefect Talmont. 


A Quote: “No problem. You don’t want to tell me who 
paid you off, so ГЇЇ just take this weapon off the stun 
setting.” 


س 


Mos Eisley 


25 


Chapter Two: Mos Eisley Overview 


*- Mos Eisley Centra 
x у SS 3 f 4 ў МУ ` Уч 


® 
5 
g 
Җ 
ā 
2 
&| 


Central 
Power and 
Water 
Distribution 
KN Plant 


26 Mos Eisley 


—STA 
"WA 


I Locations 
EB Docking Bay 94 


Docking Bay 94 is typical of the numerous 
landing bays scattered throughout the city: little 
more than a large pit gouged in the soil, with a 
simple entrance ramp for removing cargo and 
three sets of stairs to the surface (one is directly 
to street level, while the other set runs by loca- 
tion 2, “Spaceport Customs," described on page 
31). Much of the bay is below ground level — the 
floor of the bay itself is 10 meters down, as are the 
offices and maintenance 
facilities. 

The bays aresmall and 
old, harkening backtothe 
time when landing craft 
were mostly shuttles to 
orbiting ships or small 
tramp freighters, such as 
the widely-found YT-1300. 
They were designed to 
withstand the backblast 
of the older Orion-style 
ion sublight engines. 
Since most modern ships 
are equipped with the 
much more efficient 
Hoersch-Kessel ion drive 
and repulsorlift units for 
finemaneuvering, the pits 
are no longer necessary 
but they remain in use 
rather than spend the 
credits to build new fa- 
cilities. 

Ohwun De Maal, with 
his mate Chachi, are the 
proud owners of Dock- 
ing Bay 94 and are con- 
sidered to run some of 
the best independent 
bays in Mos Eisley. Like 
the other independents, 
the frequency of the De 
Maal’s business is di- 
rectly tied to “gifts” be- 
stowed upon Jabba the 
Hutt. But since the crime 
lord also insures protec- 
tion from harassing 
thugs and busybody gov- 


Mos Eisley 


ernment officials, the De Maals (until recently) 
did not begrudge the high insurance premiums. 

Mos Eisley’s docking bay rates are far below 
galactic standard — Docking Bay 94 charges 25 
credits a day for the bay (raised twice from the 
original 20). Restocking and resupply fees are 8 
credits per person’s worth of consumables for 
one day (about 20% below standard rates); fuel 
cells are replaced at a cost of 10 credits per cell 


Docking Bay 94 


John Paul Lona 


. Locations 


5 
š 
F4 
> 


(a standard light freighter has 50 cells). 

The De Maals employ three part-time assis- 
tants who load and unload cargo, service the 
ships which come in, do moderate cleaning and 
maintenance chores, perform Mynock inspec- 
tions, and supervise delivery of goods. They also 
work at the De Maals other docking bays and 
warehouses. They also have an odd assortment 
of Droids underfoot who seem always to be busy 
working at things, but never seem capable of 
finishing a job without organic help. 

1. Office: This room contains the transmitter 
for scheduling services with spaceport control, 
as well as filing and coordination computers. 
This room also holds all authorization permits 
needed to operate the bay. 

2. Restroom: Public restroom. Usable but not 
pretty. 

3. Maintenance Garage: This room holds most 
of the machinery needed to service the ships 
which arrive here. It includes two binary load 
lifters for transporting cargo to and from a ship's 
hold. If Geordi Hans from Spaceport Speeders is 
around, he'll usually be found in here, tinkering. 

4. Ship Supplies: Everything from oxygen to 
lubricantto basic proteins (for ship food converter 
systems) are stored here. The materials are pur- 
chased in bulkand meted out to ships as part ofthe 
common usage fee for the landing bay. 

5. Passenger Entrance: All bipedal crew mem- 
bers and passengers use this accessway to and 
from the bay. At the top of the stairs is a blast 
door (Strength 6D Character-scale) which can be 
sealed, but is usually left open while a ship is 
docked. Beggars and flim-flam artists (playing 


АВ 
ARS 


simple shell games) mark off territory and posi- 
tion themselves to be the first to take advantage 
Of any new arrivals, while pickpockets watch to 
see who has money. It is unlikely that any of these 
characters has any useful information, but occa- 
sionally one of Jabba's or Valarian's cronies can 
be spotted sulking about. The alley has been 
quiet as of late, with the reduced traffic to Bay 94. 
The De Maals would like to see the alleyway kept 
clear of such riffraff, but they have little chance of 
being able to get anything done about it. 

6. Back Blast Ceiling Vent: These vents were 
designed to soften the discharge of radiation 
from Orion ion sublight engines. Although the De 
Maals keep the vents clear (as per regulations), 
there hasn't been a use for them for over seventy 
years. 

7.Sand Trap: А lot of sand gets kicked up when 
a craft enters or leaves the bay. These electro- 
static repellors help restrain the sandstorm to 
the pit itself: especially important if the door is 
open at the top of the passenger entrance stair- 
way. 

8. Fusion Generators: The three converters 
sitting out in the bay are hooked into the huge 
fusion generator mounted at back of the mainte- 
nance garage. They are used to refuel ships, 
recharging the ship's power cells. The De Maals 
charge the going rate, or ten credits for recharg- 
ing one cell per hour. A typical empty light 
freighter can be charged in 50 hours. 

9. Landing Lights: The eight landing lights 
mark off the landing circle in Docking Bay 94 for 
night landings. 

10. Docking Pit: The floor of the bay is heavily 


eee 


28 


Mos Eisley 


STAR LO CELO TS 
NARS ln 


reinforced durasteel, and the walls (not needing 
to handle as much weight) are lighter pourstone. 

11. Entrance Ramp: This powered ramp is 
used to transport cargo or non-ambulatory pas- 
sengers to and from the bay floor to the surface. 
When fully extended the ramp runs nearly to the 
center of the pit floor. It exits into a wide service 
alley. 

12. Tractor Beams: Built into the bay wall at 
ground level, these eight small standard tractor 
beam dishes can grab ships that are within 100 
meters of Docking Bay 94. The tractor beams are 
linked, with a combined Strength rating of 2D 
(starfighter scale): insufficient to hold a ship 
against the pilot's will, but strong enough to 
guide a willing ship to its berth. 

Two of the beams are starting to give out, so 
one of the De Maals must be on hand to run the 
tractor beam computer and manually compen- 
sate for their weakened pull. The computer is 
located in the Office (location one) and the op- 
erator must watch through video monitors. 

13. Service Entrance. This entrance, a simple 
stairwell leading to a blast door at surface level, 
wasoriginally built with the bay, but the De Maals 
have never used it. The blast door leads to a 
short hallway, which opens into the street. 

14. Customs Inspector's Office. Discussed in 
location 2, “Spaceport Customs,” page 31. 


The De Maals 


The De Maals also own five other docking bays 
(27, 43, 67, 71 and 86), a service shuttle, and eight 
nearby warehouses, from which they make most 
of their profit. The warehouses charge 5 credits 
per ton of cargo storage per week (average for 
Mos Eisley), and each can hold 250 tons of cargo. 

Current relations between the De Maals and 
Jabba are strained. One of their regular custom- 
ers, a Corellian smuggler who regularly worked 
for Jabba, defied the quarantine of Mos Eisley 
and took off from their bay. It took almost an 
entire season for the De Maals to prove their 
innocence in the affair — although it may just be 
that the authorities waited until things quieted 
down to hand back their docking permit. 

Nonetheless, the Hutt was supposed to handle 
such interferences. Although he arranged for 
bail while the charges were pending, they were 
required to pay it back (with 25% interest — a 
relatively modest rate for Jabba). The loss of a 
season, and their good name, has not been over- 
come. Their business is still only three-fourths of 
what it should be. Chachi and Ohwun haven't 
quite decided what to do about it, nor have they 
figured out how to collect on the outstanding 
debt of the formerly-honorable Corellian who 
skipped out on them. 


Chachi De Maal 
Template Type: Duros Docking Bay Owner 
Loyalty: To Ohwun De Maal 
Height: 1.8 meters 
Species: Duros 
Sex: Female 
Homeworld: Duro System, Jivv Space City 
Age: 35 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D+1, blaster: blaster pistol 5D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Alien species 3D+1, alien species: Humans 
5D, languages 3D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Communications 3D+2, repulsorlift opera- 
tion 4D+1, space transports 6D 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Bargain 5D+2 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Computer programming/repair 4D, space 
transports repair 7D+2 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 8 


Ohwun De Maal 
Template Type: Duros Businessman 
Loyalty: To Chachi De Maal 
Height: 1.8 meters 
Species: Duros 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Tatooine 
Age: 38 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 3D+2, dodge 5D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Alien species 3D, alien species: Humans 
4D+2, business 4D+1 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation 6D+1, 
sensors 3D+2, space transports 5D, space 
transports: YT-1300 7D, space transports: 
Service Shuttle 23K 7D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+2 
Bargain 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Droid programming 5D+1, Droid repair 5D, 
medicine 4D, space transports repair 7D+2 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 10 
Special Abilities: 
Starship Intuition: Duros make very capable 


starship pilots. When a character is generated, 
he may only place ID in the following skills, but 


Mos Eisley 


29 


Mike Vilardi 


Arjon F.M.P. 


Template Type: Flighty Card Shark 
Loyalty: To herself and then the 


De Maals 
Height: 1.5 meters 
Species: Human 
Sex: Female 
Homeworld: Ord Mantell 
Age: 24 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Blaster 4D+2, dodge 5D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 


yellow skin and almond-shaped eyes. 
Shedressesintypical Tatooine browns 
and tans. 


Background: Arjon F.M.P. (*F.M.P.” to 
her friends) stopped at Tatooine for a 
layover and never boarded her con- 
necting flight. Sheno longer is sure why 
she stays: her home is long gone, her 
lover has no doubt stopped wondering 
what happened to her, and her own 
memory of that life has faded. Arjon has 
taken up card sharking in the alley di- 


Languages 4D+1, planetary systems 5D rectly adjacent to Docking Bay 94. She 


MECHANICAL 2D 


has a continuing feud with the begging 


Astrogation 3D+1, space transports 4D Јама further down the alley. 


PERCEPTION 3D 


Objectives: Keep her spot in the alley, 


Con 4D, con: card sharking 5D+2, gam- keep food in her belly and an eye out 


bling 6D+1, persuasion 5D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 5D«1 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 


Computer programming/repair 3D 


Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 4 


for news. 


Personality: F.M.P. is a typical gre- 
garious con artist, with по real scruples 
about deceiving a naive passerby. She 
does not otherwise engage in stealing: 
pickpocketing, for example, offends 
her. 


A Quote: “Step right up. Choose your 


Equipment: Comlink, hold-out blaster card, let me guess which one it is. If l'm 
(3D+1 damage, 3-4/8/12), card deck, ^ wrong, you win the pot. Гуе got a one 


clothes. 


Description: Arjon F.M.P. has golden- 


receives 2D in those skills: archaic starship pilot- 
ing, astrogation, capital ship gunnery, capital ship 
shields, sensors, space transports, starfighter pilot- 
ing, starship gunnery, and starship shields. This 
bonus also applies to any specializations. 

Eguipment: Comlink (on belt), work clothes, 
various starship repair tools, datapad, 100 cred- 
its, magnetic grapplers, fusion welder (5D dam- 
age, 1 meter range) 

Description: Chachi and Ohwun De Maal ap- 
pear to be unremarkable Duros. Their blue skin, 
noseless faces, similar body types and slitted 
mouths contribute to their undifferentiated ap- 
pearance. This makes them difficult to distin- 
guish from each other. 

Background: The De Maals, it seems, have 
always owned Docking Bay 94. Actually, Ohwun's 
parents owned it before him, and his grand- 
mother before them. The De Maals are hard- 
working, decent beings, who want nothing more 
than to have the gangsters and the civil war go 
away. As this does not look likely, they are con- 
sidering alternate avenues, but aren't really sure 
what it is that they want. 


in sixty-three chance. C'mon, place 
your bets." 


Personality: Chachi and Ohwun are devout 
Duros, who follow in the traditions of their folks. 
This means walk quietly, talk quietly, play fairly. 

Objectives: To stay on Mos Eisley with their 
friends and to make a decent, honest living. 

A Quote: "Sure, we can have you refueled in 
less than a day. Your fuel cells just need some 
topping off. Glad to oblige for a good customer, 
Han." 


The Service Shuttle 


Many landing bay services can gain additional 
income by using service shuttles to refuel large, 
non-atmospheric craft. In addition, some landing 
bay companies offer shuttle service between the 
surface and the spacecraft. The De Maals are no 
exception. 

They own a dilapidated, but sturdy Gallofree 
Yards service shuttle which has room to trans- 
port small groups planetside and enough medi- 
cal supplies to aid small crews in distress. They 
charge 10 credits to restock the equivalent of one 
day’s worth of supplies for one person (minimum 
charge of 250 credits). Replacement fuel cells are 


Mos Eisley 


TAR M Locations 
O RaR Еа 


replaced ata flat 25 credits each. Shuttle fares are 
20 credits per person one way. 

Docking Bay 94 holds a contract with Space- 
port Speeders to regularly inspect and service 
the service shuttle, as well as their pair of binary 
load lifters. 


Gallofree Yards Service Shuttle 
Craft: Gallofree Yards Service Shuttle 23K 
Type: Orbital service shuttle 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 18 meters 
Skill: Space transports: Service Shuttle 23K 
Crew: | 
Crew Skill: Space transports 4D 
Passengers: 6* 

Cargo Capacity: 1 metric ton* 


Consumables: | day 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: none 
Hyperdrive Backup: none 
Nav Computer: none 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Space: 2 
Atmosphere: 225; 650 kmh 
Hull: 1D+1 
Shields: None 
Sensors: 

Passive: 10/1D 

Scan: 15/1D+2 

Search: 20/2D 

Focus: 1/2D+2 
Weapons: None 
*Service shuttle can hold either passengers or cargo. 


ESI Spaceport Customs 


This small, dingy office, adjacent to Docking Bay 
94, serves as a field office for customs officers who 
must work in the inner sections of Mos Fisley (the 
central office is part of location 23, “Mos Eisley 
Spaceport Control Tower" several blocks away). 

Due to the rather lax customs regulations of 
Mos Eisley, this building is vacant most of the 
time — dust has settled throughout the rooms 
and each has a stuffy smell, as if the ventilators 
have broken down (they have). 

There are three doors to get into the building: 
oneonasecond floor balcony, one openingin the 
streets of Mos Eisley, and one along the stairwell 
corridor leading from the surface to Docking Bay 
94. Each has a Strength 3D door with a lock 
requiring an Easy security roll to open. 

1. Security Chiefs Office. This office has never 
been used, but it is slated for Mos Eisley's Secu- 
rity Chief, who never leaves the Spaceport Con- 
trol Tower if he can help it. The room has a desk 
andachair; the computer was stolen long ago by 
a deputy customs officer. 

2. Assistant's Office. The Security Chief's as- 
sistant, Gevrell, works in this office. He is only 
found here when he's tryingto hide from his boss 
and avoid getting work done. Most of the time he 
simply drops datadisks on the desks of his assis- 
tants (rooms three and four). 

The room has a desk, a reclining chair, a 
computer, a holographic portrait of Gevrell's 
wife (an unattractive woman of indeterminable 
age), along with a broken fan. There is also an 
audio comm terminal (this system is used 
throughout the city). 

3, 4. Inspectors' Offices. АП of the less experi- 
enced inspectors operate out of these offices — 
there are eight desks per room (all seem to be in 


Mos Eisley 


use, but that's because when an inspector runs 
out of room on his desk, he simply uses the one 
next to him). The desks are piled high with 
datadisks, confiscated goods (which are sup- 
posed to bein the supply room), broken gear and 
personal effects. 

5. Supply Room. This room has two cham- 
bers, but there is no door between them. The left 
chamber has supplies for inspectors — blaster 
pistols (AD damage), combat vests (+2 versus 
blasters, +1D versus physical attacks), inspec- 
tors' badges (just have a computer imprint infor- 
mation on the badge and insert a photo), helmets 
with comlinks, belts for carrying tools, various 
inspection tools, datapads with all customs regu- 
lations and fines pre-entered, blank data disks, 
blaster power packs and other items that would 
be of use. The right chamber has evidence that 
has been confiscated from smugglers and such: 
deactivated Droids, weapons, datapads and com- 
puters, clothing, bootleg entertainment 
holotapes, computer components, parts for ille- 
gal starship engine modifications and the like. 


Spaceport Customs 


Locations 


АЕ 
ARS 


ШШ Spaceport Speeders 


The Spaceport Speeders shop, southeast of 
Docking Bay 94, is an unassuming affair. It offers 
a motley collection of speeders of all shapes, 
sizes, and degrees of repair, and the occasional 
oddball speeder bike or sub-orbital craft. The 
shop itself contains an average assortment of 
tools and equipment. 

Unut Poll, the Arconan proprietor, has a small 
apartment below the shop. He employs a young 
Human mechanic named Geordi Hans and asales- 
man, Wioslea, who in addition to her sales skills, 
is fluent in many languages. In addition to sales, 
Spaceport Speeders also rents and repairs ve- 
hicles. 

Spaceport Speeders has repair contracts with 
five local docking bays for their loading equip- 
ment. In addition, those docking bays refer re- 
pair requests to Unut. 

Geordi Hans is the real star of Spaceport Speed- 
ers. He has his own landspeeder, which is more 
often up on blocks than actually in use. Geordi 
prefers tinkering — either with his own vehicle or 
someone else’s. He is well-known for his me- 
chanical ability, and the locals in the area often 
seek his advice on engines, or pay him to repair 
their speeders. 


шш Unut Poll makes an art of negotiating with leery customers. 


Speeder Sale! 


The speeders described are samples of the 
kinds of vehicles available for sale by Spaceport 
Speeders; new craft come in and go out over the 
course ofa few seasons. In many cases, they have 
been modified by either the original owner or by 
Geordi; some have been so battered by use that 
their game stats are lower than typical vehicles 
of that model. 

The prices listed reflect the price at which 
Unut is prepared to sell. Unut is fairly reasonable 
as far as pricing. The listed price is often 5-10% 
lower than what a comparable reseller across 
town might charge. Many of these speeders were 
seen in Mos Eisley, or in the Lars garage during 
Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope. 


Incom T-16 Skyhopper 
Craft: Incom T-16 Skyhopper 
Type: Skyhopper 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 5.2 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: skyhopper 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: None 
Cover: 3/4 


32 


Mos Eisley 


—SDARLIL———————— H—Á——— locations 
RE nen 


"WA 


Cargo Capacity: 25 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-150 km 

Cost: 7,100 credits (used); 300/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 3D 

Move: 450; 1300 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D+1 

Weapons: 

Four Stun Lasers (fire linked) 
Fire Arc: Front 

Skill: Vehicle blasters 

Fire Control: 0D 

Range: 50-300/800/1.5KM 
Damage: 2D* 

*Stun damage only 

Speed and agility arethe highlight ofthis older 
but popular skyhopper. It uses mechanical con- 
trol flaps to brake and change direction, allowing 
it to turn on a coin without slowing. The T-16 is 
equipped with ion afterburners in addition to its 
standard repulsorlift engine, enablingit to achieve 
suborbital flight. 

Its vertical panel extends down and forward, 
visually separating the front windshield into two 
halves. This can be unnerving to the inexperi- 
enced pilot, but the heads-up tactical holodisplay 
flawlessly projects a simulation of the obscured 
terrain. 

This particular T-16 was retrofitted with a 
bank of four forward-mounted stun lasers, pow- 
erful enough to stun small animals. When Unut 
purchased it, someone was in the midst of over- 
hauling its engine; Geordi Hans spent the better 
part of two days reassembling the engine and it 
now runs flawlessly. 

Although Unut rarely worries about ownership 
of the vehicles he purchases, the group of Jawas 
who sold it to him didn’t seem the type to deal in 
airskimmers. Nevertheless, everything seemed in 
order, and Unut needed new inventory. 


SoroSuub XP-38A Speeder 

Craft: SoroSuub XP-38A 

Type: Landpeeder 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 7.4 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 2 

Cover: 3/4- 

Cargo Capacity: 5 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 

Cost: 1,600 credits (used); 45/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 2D 

Move: 35; 100 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D 

Weapons: None 

SoroSuub's XP-38 is the currently the most 
advanced and hottest-selling landspeeder on the 
market. Performance (it is capable of reaching 


Mos Eisley 


320 kilometers per hour), along with a stylish 
reclining seat and aerodynamic design, easily 
keeps it ahead of the competition. Their popular- 
ity has even reached Tatooine: a few have been 
sighted in the streets of Mos Eisley. The XP-38A 
is the precursor to this hot rod, and is far more 
common. The XP-38A ground speederis designed 
more as a utility vehicle than a racer. Technically 
capable of seating three (one uncomfortably), it 
is usually advertised as a two-seater. 

Just like the XP-38, this model sports the now- 
famous autopilot shaped to resemble an 
Astromech Droid. Geordi advised Unut that it no 
longer runs as fast or as well as it did when it was 
new. It also has a broken sensor array which 
Geordi has been unable to fix — much to his 
consternation. 

This heavily-used landspeeder was one of two 
sold to him by a group of eager Jawas. lt wasn't 
until a day later, when cleaning out the speeder, 
that Unut found evidence of a previous owner. 
Wedged behind the rear seat was a holocube 
showing a family of three: a boy of about fifteen 
with his parents. The more Unut studied the 
picture, the more he thought he recognized the 
boy. Unut keeps the holocube on the desk in his 
office, having decided to make a hobby out of 
discovering who the speeder used to belong to. 
So far he has had no luck. 


Bespin Motors Void-Spider 
TX-3 Air Taxi 
Craft: Bespin Motors Void-Spider TX-3 
Air Taxi 

Type: Landspeeder 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 7.6 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 1 

Cover: 3/4 

Cargo Capacity: 7 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-5 meters 

Cost: 12,000 (new); not for rental 

Maneuverability: 3D+1 

Move: 105; 300 KMH 

Body Strength: 1D+1 

Weapons: None 

Bespin Motors. The name signifies attention 
to detail, quality and superior performance, both 
for personal and commercial vehicles. 

The TX-3 is powered by a highly efficient 
Quadrex Corestar repulsorlift engine, and solar 
panels along the exterior of the craft power an 
induction cooling system. 

The unusual bubble domed vehicle looks 
cramped when viewed from afar, but actually 
affords more leg space than the popular XP-38. 


Locations 


— STAR 
A 


sera ZZ 


Theoccupants sit side by side, facing in opposite 
directions. 


Mobguet A-1 Deluxe Floater 

Craft: A-1 Deluxe Floater landspeeder 

Type: Landspeeder 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 7.1 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 1 

Cover: 1/2 

Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 

Asking Price: 6,500 credits (new); 150/day 

(rental) 

Maneuverability: 1D+1 

Move: 55; 160 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D 

Weapons: None 

The Deluxe (as it is referred to) is not the 
fastest, sleekest, or most desirable craft avail- 
able. Instead, this rocket-like craft offers two 
things: reliability, and low cost. Intended by 
Mobquet Industries to be a craft that anyone 
could afford, they kept the machine down to the 
basics. The passengers sit one behind the other. 
The exhaust outlets are almost completely out- 
side the main body: it is possible to get burned 
getting out of a Mobquet Deluxe. The inlet ports 
on the front of the vehicle betray its forced-air- 
cooled design. Unfortunately, this system is well 
known for failing to prevent outside odors from 
filtering into the canopy. 

It is lacking numerous luxuries that are stan- 
dard on most other craft: autopilot, entertain- 
ment systems, navigation beacon sensor, and 
on-board computers. The company's marketing 
efforts have emphasized affordability: despite 
its low cost, the Deluxe still retains a high resale 
value. The body of the Mobquet often disinte- 
grates before the engine quits. 

Unut ordered two of this particular model 
after getting in a used original Mobquet A-1, 
which sold within two days. It appears to have 
been a mistake: these unremarkable models, 
despitean excellent price (reduced twice so far), 
have been here for two seasons. 


Ubrikkian 9000 Z001 
Craft: Ubrikkian 9000 Z001 
Type: Landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 6.8 meters 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 2 
Cover: 3/4 
Cargo Capacity: 50 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level-3 meters 


Asking Price: 7,500 (rebuilt); 85/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 3D+1 

Move: 55; 160 KMH 

Body Strength: 2D+1 

Weapons: None 

The rounded design of the 9000 reflects the 
species this model was aimed at: the amorphous 
Ugors. It has viewports on all sides. While the 
original model failed to attract very many buyers 
(despite several design features, including a 
unique boarding system: the craft elevated, al- 
lowing the Ugor to flow under and up into the 
craft, which sealed after boarding), Ubrikkian 
Yards was unfazed. The company modified the 
original concept, and released the 9000 Z001. 

The Z001 has a trio of seats around a central 
shaft, presenting an unresolved problem of move- 
ment sickness. TheZ001 is entered by elevating the 
chassis up from its base. The occupants simply 
walk under it and allow it to lower around them. 

It possesses incredible maneuverability for a 
landspeeder, something Ubrikkian Yards touts 
when complaints surface about its speed. 


SoroSuub XP-291 Skimmer 

Craft: SoroSuub XP-291 Skimmer 

Type: Landspeeder 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 6.5 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 3 

Cover: 3/4 

Cargo Capacity: 10 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-2 meters 

Asking Price: 3,500 credits (used); 30/day 

(rental) 

Maneuverability: 2D+1 

Move: 80; 230KPH 

Body Strength: 2D«2 

Weapons: None 

To look at, you'd never think this speeder 
would amount to much. Its flat bullet shape masks 
theforced-air-cooled system (with the same odor 
problems as the Mobquet A-1 Deluxe Floater). 
The engines are not manufacturer’s original: 
Geordi thinks that the originals were blown, but 
the replacements offer better performance than 
the manufacturer’s specs. Unfortunately, the 
condition of the chassis masks the care with 
which the engines were handled, making this a 
hard sell. Unut originally priced the speeder at 
4,000 credits. After three seasons, it is now down 
to 3,500. 


Ikas-Adno Starhawk 
Craft: Ikas-Adno Starhawk 2b 
Type: Speeder bike 
Scale: Speeder 
Length: 5 meters 


34 


Mos Eisley 


Ubrikkian 9000 
Z001 


Mos Eisley 


S 
GoCorp Arunskin 32 
Cargo Skiff 


Bespin Motors Void-Spider 
TX-3 Air Taxi 


Locations 


35 


John Paul Lona 


Skill: Repulsorlift operation: speeder bike 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: None 

Cover: 1/4 

Cargo Capacity: 3 kilograms 

Altitude Range: Ground level-12 meters 

Asking Price: 3,600 (used); not for rental 

Maneuverability: 3D+1 

Move: 125; 360 KPH 

Body Strength: 1D+1 

Weapons: None 

Rarely does Unut price a vehicle based on 
market demand instead of quality, but the out-of- 
production Starhawk is not just any bike. It has 
thesame mystique afforded to it as other legend- 
ary vehicles of old. Songs are sung and stories are 
told of Starhawks being passed down from par- 
enttochild. At Bestine's annualStarswoop Biker's 
Fair, which is ostensibly for swoops, the 
Starhawks are the highlight of the show. 

The Starhawk is not the fastest speeder bike, 
but it is among the most graceful, and one of the 
most sought-after, especially by collectors. 

Geordi has been carefully eyeing the bike ever 
since it showed up. Unut hasn't admitted this to 
anyone else, but one of the reasons the bike is 
priced so high is to discourage sales. He has 
decided if it does not sell in the next season, he 
will give it to Geordi as a birthday gift. 


GoCorp Arunskin 32 Cargo Skiff 

Craft: GoCorp Arunskin 32 Cargo Skiff 

Type: Skiff 

Scale: Speeder 

Length: 17.2 meters 

Skill: Repulsorlift operation: skiff 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: 14 

Cover: 1/4 

Cargo Capacity: 100 metric tons 

Altitude Range: Ground level-50 meters 

Cost: 9,000 credits (used); 100/day (rental) 

Maneuverability: 1D 

Move: 30; 90 KPH 

Body Strength: 1D+2 

Weapons: None 

The Ubrikkian Bantha II Cargo Skiff's work- 
horse reputation was well known. Unfortunately, 
it was also well known for its rather flimsy chas- 
sis. The upstart GoCorp company attempted to 
capitalize on that weakness by offering the 
Arunskin 32: it is equipped with a tougher shell 
without losing the Bantha's primary selling point 
of cargo capacity. 

This particular cargo skiff was fitted with a 
complete Wengel communications/entertain- 
ment system. This equipment stands out in an 
otherwise utilitarian craft. Unut isn't quite sure 
what to make of it, and has done little to actually 
push the sale. 


_ocations os у АЎ 
= Ame 


Unut And Geordi 


Unut first met Geordi Hans when he was a 
street urchin, repairing speeders outside bars in 
order to get something to eat. The Arconan in- 
stinct for insuring the safety of their young influ- 
enced Unut to look out for the scrawny kid from 
Motesta township, and they now share a warm, 
almost family relationship, with Unut occasion- 
ally referring to Geordi as a “hatchling” — a 
young Arconan. 

Unut has an excellent reputation in the city, 
even if he is stingy with his credits. Unut, as a 
small businessman, has been able to steer clear 
of most of the gang violence and inner conflicts. 

Due to a great tragedy in his past, Unut works 
for the Rebel Alliance, and is its main contact in 
Mos Eisley. However, he is extremely cautious in 
his activities in order to avoid detection. 


Unut Poll 

Template Type: Arcona Refugee 

Loyalty: To himself, Geordi Hans and the 

Rebel Alliance 

Height: 1.6 meters 

Species: Arcona 

Sex: Male 

Homeworld: Cona 

Age: 70+ 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

Alien species 3D, business 2D+2, languages 

4D+2, languages: Basic 5D, streetwise 3D+2, 

planetary systems 2D-1, planetary systems: 

Alderaan 4D+1, planetary systems: Cona 

3D+2, planetary systems: Coruscant 3D, 

planetary systems: Tatooine 4D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 4D 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Bargain 4D+1, con 6D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

Digging 4D 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Computer programming/repair 3D, 

repulsorlift repair 2D 

Special Skills: 

Strength skills: 

Digging. Time to use: One round or longer. 
This skill is used to dig through ground or other 
substances. 

Special Abilities: 

Senses: Arcona have weak long-distance vi- 
sion (add +10+о the difficulty when making checks 
requiring vision at distances greater than 15 
meters), but have excellent close range senses, 
because their eyes, their sense of smell and a 
heat-sensing bulb provide detailed information 
on close-range movement, the presence of heat 
sources and such (add «1D to Perception for 


Mos Eisley 


STAR Locations 


"WA 


checks closer than 15 meters when using heat, 
smell or movement). 

Thick hide: Arcona have tough, armored hides 
that add +1D to Strength against physical attacks 
(not laser or energy). 

Talons: Arconahave sharp digging talons which 
add +1D to climbing, Strength (in combat) or 
digging. 

Salt weakness: Arcona are easily addicted to 
salt: if an Arcona consumes salt, he must make a 
Very Difficult willpower not be addicted and need 
salt at least once a day or suffer-1D to all actions. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 20 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D+2 damage, 
2/4/8), ammonia tablets, clothing, 200 credits, 
datapad (pre-programmed with rental contracts), 
disguise kit. 

Description: An older Arconan, Unut's face is 
careworn and gentle, characteristics which are 
obvious no matter what species the observer 
happens to be. 

Background: Unut Poll is not really who he 
seems to be. The original Unut owned Spaceport 
Speeders — the "new" Unut is a refugee of the 
Galactic Civil War. No one knows his true name or 
identity. 

The new Unut is old enough to have witnessed 
the fall of the Republic. After the Empire executed 
his wife and children in the mistaken belief that 
they were involved in a local uprising on Cona, he 
did his best to hide innocent men, women, and 
children left behind during the Empire's purges, 
and to give them homes and new identities. He 
escaped to Tatooine, and took over the company 
fromthe dying owner. Heuses disguisetechniques 
to keep his true identity secret. He aids the Rebel- 
lion, no matter how quietly. 

Personality: Unut is a quirky old codger, with 
a heart of gold. He is a gentle persuader and 
relentless charmer. 

Objectives: To remain ignorant of the chang- 
ing galaxy as long as possible. 

A Quote: "There are only three areas of legal 
commerce — antiques, used vehicles, and real 
estate — in which prices and terms are set by 
negotiation. Fixed labels and prices don't mean a 
thing. So ... how much do you think the speeder 
is really worth?" 


Geordi Hans 
Template Type: Young Mechanic 
Loyalty: To Unut Poll 
Height: 1.6 meters 
Species: Human 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Tatooine 
Age: 17 


DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Streetwise 3D, survival: desert 4D«2 

MECHANICAL 4D 

Repulsorlift operation 6D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Search 3D+1 

STRENGTH 3D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Computer programming/repair 5D+1, Droid 

programming 4D- 1, Droid repair 5D+2, 

repulsorlift repair 7D, space transports 
repair 4D+2 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 3 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 2 

Description: Geordi has black hair and alert 
brown eyes. 

Background: Geordi's parents abandoned him 
when he was six years old. Forced to fend for 
himself in a rough frontier town, he soon hitched a 
ride to Mos Fisley. Once there, he quickly learned 
about growing up. Having been swindled and 
double-crossed enough times to learn from it, he 
began tinkering with machines. They, at least, 
never lied. He spent his formative years repairing 
speeders and avoiding truant officers. Eventually 
he met Unut Poll, a kindly Arconan who treated him 
well. Judging from the way that Unut has been 
talking lately (about Geordi taking over the busi- 
ness), Geordi fears that he must soon choose 
between taking over Unut's business or following 
his own path out among the stars. 

Objectives: To get that extra bit of perfor- 
mance out of a vehicle. 

A Quote: "Yeah, but see right here? The 
transcore gear is stripped. I’m afraid we'll have to 
take this entire engine apart.” 


Wioslea 


Template Type: Vuvria Salesperson 
Loyalty: To herself 

Height: 1.9 meters 

Species: Vuvria 

Sex: Female 

Homeworld: Unknown 

Age: 34 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Dodge 4D+1, pick pocket 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D+2, alien species: Humans 
6D, business 3D+2, cultures 4D+1, languages 
5D+1, languages: Aqualish 6D, languages: 
Arcona 5D+2, languages: Vregg (Gamorrean 
dialect) 7D, languages: Huttese 7D, lan- 
guages: Rodian 6D+1, languages: Sullustan 
7D, planetary systems 4D, streetwise 5D, 


Mos Eisley 


37 


Locations 


John Paul Lona 


S ŠĀ 
J 


streetwise: Tatooine 6D+2, value 4D, value: 

landspeeders 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 3D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 5D, con 4D+2, gambling 4D+2, 

persuasion 4D+2 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0 

Equipment: Long cloak, comlink, datapad, 200 
credits 

Description: A tall Vuvria, with an almost comi- 
cal face, Wioslea is a disarming personality: her 
physical appearance greatly relaxes customers, 
allowing her to cleverly drive hard bargains. 

Background: No one knows where the Vuvria 
comes from, and she won't talk about it. She had 
been on Tatooine for a few months before she 
approached Unut for a job, and she has served 
well since then. Unfortunately, she has gotten 
into debt to one of Jabba’s con man cronies (for 
over 1000 credits!), and thus she is quietly spying 
for the crime lord. 

Personality: Friendly, but intensely private. 
She doesn't tell anyone any more about herself 
than she has to. 

Objectives: To pay off her debts, and then look 
to relocate to another planet. 

Quote: “4,000 credits ... only 4,000. You look 
like you could use a break, kid. Sold.” 


The Farns 


Geordi Hans, and his buddies, Jeff Pill and 
Franklin “Shorty” Scott, are the sole members of 
a “swoop” gang called the Farns. Actually, they 
are swoop gang wannabes, since only Franklin 
has a bike, and it is a speeder bike, not a swoop. 

The fourth quasi-member of their group is the 
Droid Ay-BeeSix (A-B6); she can be seen hanging 
around asking questions and generally getting in 
the way. The gang puts up with her, mostly 
because she will do almost anything and go 
almost anywhere for them. 

The group is occasionally thoughtless when it 
comes to the Droid: Franklin once asked Ay- 
BeeSix to go into the Mos Eisley Cantina, a known 
den of thieves, rogues, and brigands, and get a 
hydrospanner wrench. She came out with one, all 
right, but was closely followed by its owner, a 
very angry Gamorrean. Since putting her back 
together, they’ve treated her better. 

When Second Twilight approaches, they can 
usually be seen on the outskirts of town, tinker- 
ing with Geordi’s speeder and Franklin’s heavily 
modified Ikas-Adno Starhawk. 

This group is honest and unthreatening — 
they would rather race than wreak havoc. Their 
true dream is to escape Mos Eisley, but Jeff is 
unmotivated, Franklin is scared, and Geordi has 
realized that Unut Poll has dreams of eventually 
handing over the shop to him. For now, the locals 
must remain ready to jump out of the way when 
the “gang” tears through the streets at First 
Twilight, trying to beat their own record for 
getting out of town. 


38 


Mos Eisley 


Locations 


Mos Eisley 39 


Locations 


AR 
(ARS 


ESILups General Store 


This establishment is actually named Lup's 
Wares and Supplies, but most everyone knows it 
as "Lup's General Store." Kal Lup and her hus- 
band Tar run the store, and despite their fierce, 
wolf-like appearance, they are both friendly and 
helpful. 

The store contains provisions, supplies, and a 
smattering of machinery. The main display room 
(about eight by five meters) has the front door on 
thesouth wall; oppositeit is arow of countertops 
with barstools, with a monitor at each seat. These 
are touch-screen activated, allowing the pro- 
spective patron to browse the catalog of avail- 
able merchandise. Out of the fifteen monitors, six 
are still functioning (one in black and white). 
There are three metal doors on the wall behind 
the counter. 

Mounted on the left wall is a block of twelve 
large monitors, advertising the day’s specials 
and the latest merchandise. All of these still 
work, but the sound fades in and out. Kal has 
been meaning to fix it but can never find the time. 

The first of the doors leads to a large, well-lit 
bathroom. The mirror above the rinsing station 
can slide open. Here is where most illegal trans- 
actions are conducted between the Lups and 
their customers. 


The second door leads to a pair of rear offices 
and a meeting room. This is where customers 
with specific (read: illegal) requests can haggle in 
private. 

The final door is the warehouse access portal, 
where three Droids pack merchandise for cus- 
tomers. 

The Lups charge reasonable prices and stock 
agood variety of foodstuffs and equipment, charg- 
ing anywhere from 90 to 110% of the prices listed 
on page 161 of the Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game, Second Edition rulebook; they charge 120% 
of market value for medical equipment and weap- 
onry. Using the availability codes on page 161 
will help establish Mos Eisley as an out-of-the 
way hole in the wall: thus, all code one products 
(“readily available”) can be found in the general 
store, most code two products (“large cities and 
spaceports”) are available or can be ordered, but 
specialized or rare products (codes three and 
four) simply cannot be had here. 

The Lups have been experiencing some trouble 
with Jabba lately. When business is slow, he still 
expects the same protection payments, while the 
Lups would prefer a sum targeted to their weekly 
gross receipts. In fact, they have demonstrated 
that the payment amount would actually increase 
under their system when business was good. But 
Jabba, concerned that the thugs he uses to pick 
up the payments might find the temptation to 
start skimming the fluctuating take to be over- 
whelming, has so far declined the offer. 

The Lups are congenial lupines, but tend to 
remember any slights and perceived rudeness. 
They do not like anyone poking about in their 
business. They have an old blaster carbine (4D+2 
damage, 3/20/150) hidden behind the counter. 


The Lups 
Height: 1.8 meters 
Species: Shistavanen Wolfman 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Dodge 4D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Business 5D+2, streetwise 6D, value 5D 
MECHANICAL 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 4D+2 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 3D+1 
Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 1 


40 


Mos Eisley 


„SSTA 
WA 


Locations 


IE Market Place: Geps Grill 


and Spaceport Express 


Less a group of established businesses, and 
more of a Gundark-flea market, Market Place is 
the spot where free enterprise agro farmers come 
to sell their produce and fledgling businesses go 
to start trade. 

The area was nothing more than a sandy lot 
when the farmers began setting up their tents 
here. Over the years, the market place has thrived, 
and no one bothers it even though no one has 
ever secured trade permits or any other official 
documentation. 

The tents mark off territory and provide pro- 
tection from the searing suns — they have solar 
energy collectors, which power cooling genera- 
tors, grill units or any other portable machinery. 
The tents offer vegetables and meat, harvested 
from underground agrofarms, or collected from 
hunters out on the Dune Sea. Some also sell 
trinkets, inexpensive tools, homespun clothing 
or other individually crafted or cheap items. 


Gep’s Grill 

Atypical stall is the one owned by Fillin Ta and 
Norun Gep, situated just behind Lup’s General 
Store. Meeting in the same jail cell when they 
were street urchins, they have since become 
friends. The two young Whiphids have been 
making a good living by rendezvousing with hunt- 
ers on the outskirts of the city and buying Bantha 
and Dewback meat from them. They do not ques- 
tion the origin of the meat, and have sometimes 
needed to cut off a brand or two which the 
careless hunters left on the haunches. 

On those off-weeks where the hunters have 
had no luck, Fillin and Norun have had no misgiv- 
ings about looting local Bantha and Dewback 
stables, using pilfering skills they picked up by 
necessity as children on the streets of Mos Eisley. 

Once hauled to the tent and prepared, the 
Whiphids grill the meat throughout the day. Many 
local workers stop by during the day to sample 
their wares. The menuis simple, but adequate for 
quick meals. 


Welcome To Gep’s Grill! 
TODAY'S SPECIALS 
Bantha Burger 1.5с 
Bantha Platter __2.0с 
(comes with all the fixin's and salamander sticks] 
Dewback Ribs (6 pack) — 2.5c 
Ribs (10 pack) 4.0c 


The Whiphids also engage in more than grill- 
ing food — old habits die hard, and smuggling is 
Mos Eisley's business after all. They perform 
small scale courier runs of weapons, spice and 
other forms of contraband for various custom- 
ers. While the boys haven't gotten into trouble 
yet, they have been quite indiscreet, crossing 
Jabba without knowing it. 


Spaceport Express 


Norun has recently allied with one of the local 
messenger services, Spaceport Express (a branch 
officeis located immediately behind Gep's Grill). 
For a piece of the action, the messenger service 
accepts orders and drops them off at the tent. 
Omon Gantum, the Quarren who runs Spaceport 
Express, was more than happy to add to his 
already ample income. 

Spaceport Express started off handling only 
legal goods: jewels, medicine, goods and informa- 
tion. After teaming up with the Whiphids, business 
has blossomed. Fillin and Norun, while on runs out 
of town for meat, buy stolen equipment or meat 
stuffed with contraband — the messenger service 
handles all inquiries and payments. 

In fact, Omon Gantum is being so helpful be- 
cause he is selling a list of the contraband to 
Valarian at the Lucky Despot. She reviews the 
deliveries and occasionally spots something 
worth looking into. This usually results in her 
sending a representative to purchase the stolen 
goods from the ultimate recipient or, less likely, 
directing a thug to waylay the messenger. So far 
Fillin and Norun are unaware of the duplicity. 


т 


Mos Eisley 


41 


AR... 
(ARS 


Locations 


[586715555 
GP. 5.228 


TODAYS у BANTHABURGERS 
SPECIAL / DEWBACK RIBS | 


Mike Vilardi 


= Mos Eisley 


TA 
"WA 


KS Docking Bay 86 


Very similar to the now infamous Docking Bay 
94, “old 86" is a round pit gouged in the soil. It is 
slightly smaller in landing space than most other 
docking bays, and the vast majority of its busi- 
ness consists of small shuttles and personal trans- 
ports (scout ships and the like). 

Old 86 has an absentee owner, Trepler 
Darklighter, who spends most of his time away 
on resort worlds (no one knows where he has 


gotten his wealth, but since heis alocal boy — his 
family is from Anchorhead — many assume it is 
from the smuggling trade). The bay is run by an 
ill tempered administrative Droid named BX-9T. 
Its humanoid, blue and red form is easily recog- 
nized in the spaceport city, and most people 
know enough not to bother with the Droid unless 
they have to. Rates for the bay are 35 credits per 
day. 


IEM Docking Bay 87 


Directly across the street from Docking Bay 
86, and within one block's walk of the famous 
Mos Eisley Cantina, Docking Bay 87 is among the 
topten favorite bays of smugglers and merchants 
in this city. The bay is of the same age as the 
others in the central portion of the city, but its 
owners have continually modernized the facility 
— currently, the landing bay is at ground level, 
with a double blast door and forcefield that opens 
directly into the street. The bay charges 30 cred- 
its per day, and restocking and maintenance 
charges are charged at the same rate as Docking 
Bay 94. Unofficially, the bay also charges a flat fee 
of 25 credits to avoid “bureaucratic hassles” (i.e., 
cargo inspections) — if the pilot in question 
doesn't pay the fee, there is a one in three chance 
that his ship will be searched; if the fee is paid, 
the ship will not be searched barring very un- 
usual circumstances. Needless to say, a good 


portion of that 25 credits is diverted to the cus- 
toms officials of Mos Eisley. 

The bay has a larger landing area than aver- 
age, enabling it to handle slightly larger ships 
(and with the size of the bays in Mos Eisley, every 
square meter counts). The bay is owned by a 
cheerful Ishi Tib (see Galaxy Guide 4: Alien Races) 
named Dr’xureretue (although he insists that 
people call him “Drue” since most people can’t 
pronounce his name). He is easy going, but un- 
compromising when it comes to fees and busi- 
ness practices; however, he will warn newcom- 
ers about how business is done in Mos Eisley, so 
he is a good source of information and gossip. Не 
has two common labor Droids that unload and 
load cargo, and Dom Antyll from location 21, 
“Docking Bay 92” performs any necessary main- 
tenance and repair work. 


IE Mos Eisley Inn 


This run-down building has the bare necessi- 
ties and little else. For 10 credits a day (officially; 
the clerks try to haggle for more and pocket the 
excess), a customer gets a place to sleep, a 
shower, and access to public communicators. 
Those who are willing to pay the extra few credits 
get the subterranean rooms, which are dark and 
cramped, but cool; those who are tough bargain- 
ers often get stuck with the rooms on the upper 
floor, which are almost unbearably warm. 


Theinn has acentral lobby with atransparisteel 
canopy and several imported trees. The clerk is 
a grumpy Human local, but for those who give a 
few extra credits he will give extra courtesy. The 
clerk knows how to get ahold of any number of 
underworld contacts, and can arrange escorts or 
any number of other services for additional tips. 
There are several beat-up servant Droids that are 
supposed to take luggage to guests’ rooms, but 
they are seldom functioning. 


ee 
Mos Eisley 43 


Locations 


АВ 
(ARS 


IK Tatooine Militia 


This building houses Mos Eisley’s militia, and 
in recent times, has become the permanent base 
of any stormtroopers stationed in the city. The 
militia used to have four full-time members, but 
they have been transferred to the newly formed 
police force. Now, however, the militia can call 
on up to 50 individuals to take up arms and put 
down Tusken Raider attacks or other potentially 
dangerous situations. In times of high crisis in 
the city, militiamen are also asked to perform 
patrol duties, but the men have been known to 
actively avoid action if at all possible. If they do 
become involved, the militiamen are likely just to 
arrest any visitors and allow the locals to escape 
punishment — after all, no one wants to arrest 
their neighbors. As it stands now, the militiamen 
are seldom called upon for duty. 

The building has a large weapons vault (Mod- 
erate security total to pick the lock; walls and 
door have a Strength of 7D). There are about 25 
blast vests, 50 blast helmets, 50 blaster carbines, 
several dozen grenades, a score of stun batons, 
spare power packs and three E-web blasters in 
the vault. 


There is always at least one militiaman on 
guard duty, and he can raise the alarm with his 
comlink. The militia uses location “10. Dewback 
Stables” to store its vehicles. 


Mos Eisley Militiaman 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 4D, dodge 5D, melee combat 3D+2, 

melee parry 3D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Intimidation 3D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 3D+1, repulsorlift operation 

3D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-5 

Equipment: Blaster carbine (5D damage, 3-25/ 
50/250), stun baton (5D stun damage), blast vest 
(+2 to energy, +1D to physical attacks), blast 
helmet (+2 to energy, +1D to physical attacks), 
comlink 


EDS Dewback Stables 


Almost as old as the city itself, these dewback 
stables hark back to a time when people couldn't 
easily afford repulsorlift vehicles and had to 
stable their dewbacks and banthas while visiting 
town. Now, the building has been turned over to 
Mos Eisley’s militia, and new facilities have been 
installed to allow the building to be used as a 
garage. 

A heavy-duty lock (Difficult security total to 
pick) has been installed on double blast doors 
(Strength 4D+1). Inside, the three armored 
landspeeders at the militia’s disposal have been 
garaged, with a simple R3 unit providing mainte- 
nance on them. The landspeeders are normally 
used only on maneuvers, which occur four times 
ayear. Most often “maneuvers” are just an elabo- 
rate excuse for the militiamen to go womp rat 
hunting, rather than a military exercise. The 
militia also has half a dozen patrol scooters, 
which are used for inner city patrol by both the 
militia and the police. 

With the addition ofa full-fledged stormtrooper 
garrison, they have begun storing their speeder 
bikes in the garage area, makingit fairly cramped. 


The R3 began loudly complaining about the lack 
of proper maintenance space until Prefect 
Talmont threatened to have its memory wiped 
and sold off to Jawas. 


Armored Landspeeders 

Craft: Modified Ikas-Adno Sunrunner zX 

landspeeder 
Type: Armored landspeeder 
Scale: Speeder 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: landspeeder 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 1, plus gunner 
Cover: 1/2 
Length: 6.2 meters 
Cargo Capacity: 40 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level - 2 meters 
Cost: 14,950 credits 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Move: 105; 300 KMH 
Body Strength: 2D 
Weapons: 

Laser Cannon 

Fire Arc: Turret 


44 


Mos Eisley 


—PTARLL——M—————— LOCOS 
аии 


МА 


Skill: Vehicle blasters 
Fire Control: 2D 
Range: 3-25/100/250 
Damage: 4D 


Patrol Scooters 
Craft: Menstar Motors 22 Patrol Scooter 
Type: Patrol scooter 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: patrol scooter 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 0 
Cover: 1/4 


ШИ Regional 


Cargo Capacity: 5 kilograms 

Length: 2.1 meters 

Altitude Range: Ground level - 4 meters 

Cost: 5,420 credits 

Maneuverability: 1D+1 

Move: 25; 70 KMH 

Body Strength: 4D 

The patrol scooter is perfect for low-speed, 
high-visibility patrols through the twisting, nar- 
row streets of the city. They aren't designed for 
high-speed pursuit against other vehicles, but 
are perfect for keeping up with suspects fleeing 
on foot. 


Government Offices 


Tatooine's administration is handled from this 
cramped building by Prefect Talmont (Governor 
Aryon is only bothered when absolutely neces- 
sary). This office handles land deeds, weapon 
licenses, Mos Eisley resident IDs (each town 
issues its own form of ID card), settlement char- 
ters, taxation and court appearances (there are 
two small courtrooms in back corners of the 
building, and court is held once per week at 
night). 

Prefect Talmont is often in his office, which 
was once a spacious, if run-down, room. How- 


ever, it is has become cramped due to a prepon- 
derance of datadisks and personal effects. It also 
has a desk, a computer, several chairs, an over- 
head fan (which never works) and a pair of lights 
near theceiling. The office hasn't been cleaned in 
several years. 

Commonly encountered personnel include 
three clerks, behind desks and computers, who 
are responsible for recording all vital informa- 
tion. There are no guards here unless there has 
been a disturbance of some kind in the city that 
requires official attention. 


ЕРЕ Power Station 


This station provides power to speeders, 
Droids and other items of machinery. As such, it 
is a place where merchants, clerks, farmers and 
others meet and discuss business, politics, the 
weather (or lack thereof) or anything else that 
springs to mind. This business is busy in the 
early morning or late afternoon, as it is a gather- 
ing place for the “common” people of Mos Eisley 
who must work daytime hours. Just by hanging 


out for a few minutes, characters are likely to 
hear a number of different rumors (all with vary- 
ing degrees of truth). The station is run by an 
unenthusiastic power Droid named 4-LB who 
seems to care little for the comings and goings of 
his customers. A speeder recharge runs about 15 
credits; Droids require only 3-4 credits worth of 
power. 


KEN Jabbas Townhouse 


Jabba the Hutt's influence in the affairs of 
Tatooineis perhaps felt most at his small, almost 
humble townhouse, in the heart of Mos Eisley. 
The Hutt has found it convenient to direct many 
of his operations through his workers at the 
townhouse, even if the Bloated One seldom comes 


Mos Eisley 


here personally. The townhouse, in addition toa 
local center of operations, also houses many 
guests who come to Tatooine to do business with 
the Hutt. Dwarfed by the Mos Eisley Inn, which 
stands alongside it, Jabba’s Townhouse is a con- 
verted blockhouse. It is here that he holds court 


John Paul Lona 


for only one week or so per season, and only for 
those business associates who he feels are wor- 
thy of his time. 

At first, the building seems to be lacking the 
kind of security one would expect of a crime 
lord's building. However, one must also bear in 
mind that retribution from the Hutt is discour- 
agement enough for criminals. 

Jabbaemploys a dozen servants andtwo dozen 
guards here; two or three of the guards are 
disguised as loiterers and beggars stationed in 
the narrow alley across the street from Jabba's 
frontdoor. These guards keep tabs on who comes 
calling, as well as how long they stay. 

All doors are heavily reinforced durasteel 
(Strength 5D), and the walls themselves have 
been reinforced against explosives (Strength 3D). 
Every portal in the building is covered by secu- 
rity cameras hidden in the doorjambs (which 
transmit to the monitoring station), along with 
motion detector "fields," which trip when any- 


Jabbas Townhouse 


_ocations osi T JA > ШЕН 
кез ity 


ARS 


thing passes through a window or door. 

Every room in Jabba's Townhouse is wired for 
sound. The recordings are often played back for 
theamusement ofthe employees, especially ones 
detailing guests' more private moments. 


Typical Guard 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Blaster 4D+2, dodge 3D, melee combat 3D+2, 

melee parry 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D, 3-12/25/50), 
vibroblade (STR+2D), blast vest (+2 from energy 
attacks, «1D from physical attacks), comlink 

Description: Jabba's guards are Human and 
alien vermin (as one might expect), but by the 
time they have completed Jabba's training pro- 
gram, they are loyal vermin. They dress in their 
own clothing, for a rather mot- 
ley appearance, but they are 
impatient and eager for a 
scrap. 

1. Main Entrance: This is the 
main entrance to the 
townhouse, and non-employ- 
ees must always use this en- 
trance. The outside is an intimi- 
dating and obviously reinforced 
blast door, with a sole sensor 
(just like the one used at the 
entrance to Jabba’s palace, as 
seen in Return of the Jedi). 

Inside, the door is attended 
at all times by four of Jabba’s 
more trusted guards. The main 
entrance can be operated only 
from the inside, and only upon 
a voice command from Jabba 
or his guards. The audience 
chamber portal at the end of 
thecorridor can be opened only 
on electronic command issued 
from Jabba's power sled. 

There is a hidden video sen- 
sor along the right wall that 
leads to Jabba’s Monitoring 
Station. 

2. Guest Quarters (4): Each 
of these rooms is luxuriously 
appointed (by Tatooine stan- 
dards, anyway). These serve 
as rooms for those visiting 
crime syndicate dignitaries 
who have earned a personal 
meeting with the Hutt. Each 
room has a video communica- 


Mos Eisley 


Locations 


Mos Eisley 47 


Allen Nunis 


tor which has a maximum range of near-orbit 
(they are bugged, of course), a personal datapad 
for the guest's use (which copies anything typed 
into it into a second, permanent storage cell in 
the basement for later retrieval and examina- 
tion). Each door has a combination lock (Moder- 
ate security difficulty to pick). 

Jabba has been known to make these suites 
available from time to time to friends, acguain- 
tances, and those who are in Mos Eisley doing his 
bidding. 

3. Lounge: This is the main recreational area 
for Jabba's guests and the guards on duty. There 
are holovids, holochess, and other games of 
amusement available. This area is off-limits to 
employees whenever guests are in residence. 

4. Employee Entrance And Storage: A sturdy 
blast door with a combination lock with a Diffi- 
cult security difficulty enters into a hall where 


АВ 
ARS 


gear can easily be stowed. Armor and weapons 
are supposed to be left here, but may be locked 
up for safekeeping, if reguested. This entranceis 
only used by employees. 

5. Dining Room: Able to accommodate many 
beings, the dining room is often an impromptu 
meeting room and card-playing area. 

6. Kitchen: Jabba's tastes are known to be ... 
different. This well-stocked kitchen and its mas- 
ter chef are eager and willing to cater to the 
Hutt's every whim. From Womp Rat stew to raw 
Dewback eggs, this kitchen can prepare it. 

7. Bathrooms: Clean, with a hidden entrance 
to the Monitoring Station (Difficult search roll to 
find). 

8. Monitoring Station: This station is located 
in the interior of Jabba's place to provide ad- 
equate shielding from outside jamming or other 
interference (or electronic eavesdropping on 
Jabba's doings). This room is accessible only 
from the bathrooms. 

9. Conference Room (2): These blast-shielded 
rooms are soundproofed and ray-shielded. They 
are also equipped with hidden video sensors (in 
addition to the standard audio sensors). 

These rooms are used to hammer out deals 
when Jabba isn't present, and is also where the 
day'stake from local merchants is counted. Each 
conference room has a hidden door (Difficult 
search to find, Moderate security total to pick the 
lock), which opens to a stairwell that leads to the 
basement vaults. 

10. Audience Chamber: When Jabba deigns 
to visit the city, this is where he resides. The dais 
was specially constructed to fit his power sled. 
The room provides enough space for contract 
negotiation, entertainment (should Jabba desire 
a performance band) or anything else the Hutt 
might want. If Jabba isn’t here, Bib Fortuna (a 
Twi'lek), Bidlo Kwerve (a Corellian pirate) or one 
of Jabba’s other lieutenants is often running 
things, while Akkik the Jawa and Gorrt the 
Gamorrean are serving as minions. 

When Jabba desires private conversations, a 
pair of heavy blast doors (Strength 7D) can be 
rolled into place, cutting off the rest of the build- 
ing. The outer door is operated only from Jabba’s 
sled (Very Difficult security roll to pick). 

Once moored in place, Jabba’s sled can func- 
tion as an elevator, able to descend into the cellar 
of the building, where he can transact cash deals 
and oversee prisoner transfers as desired. 

The Bloated One also has a sophisticated 
weapon-detecting Droid stationed in his audi- 
ence chamber. It serves to warn the Hutt of any 
firearms, explosives, or other incendiaries which 
might conceivably be hidden on a being’s per- 
son, or in a shipment (Droid has search at 8D to 
detect weapons in open view; with exotic infra- 


Mos Eisley 


ŠĀ R ————————M—í— LOCATIONS 
ae سے‎ 


ТМА 


геа sensors and the like, it has a search of 5D to 
detect hidden weapons). The Droid has, on occa- 
sion, failed to detect more exotic weapons, as 
well as weapons which seemed to be tools. 

A massive wire mesh net is suspended near 
the domed ceiling, for the use of Jabba's very 
special guests. Roosting there are four Kayven 
Whistlers (carnivores who resemble a cross be- 
tween a monkey and a bat and who have vora- 
cious appetites). The species is used to nesting 
high in the tall trees of their native planet of 
Kayven, and no longer descend to the forest 
floor. Jabba has used this trait to his advantage. 

When the Hutt is displeased, a cage descends 
to the audience chamber floor, where it is filled. 
It then rises back up past the mesh, and the door 
opens. Thevictimis freeto roam alongthetopside 
of the wire mesh — it is too narrow to allow a 
typical Human to drop down through. 

The victim remains trapped topside until the 
Whistlers are hungry, which is usually about 
twice a week. There is seldom anything to re- 
move after the Whistlers are done feasting. 

Although the Whistlers have nowhere near 
theintimidation capability that Jabba's Rancoris 
rumored to possess, they are nevertheless effec- 
tive. Many deals have been negotiated greatly in 
favor of Jabba because his negotiator became 
unnerved at the pleas and cries of trapped vic- 
tims who were awaiting the awakening of the 
Whistlers. 


Kayven Whistler 

DEXTERITY 4D 
Brawling parry 6D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 6D 
Move: 15 
Size: 1 meter long 
Attacks: 

Razored Teeth: 6D damage. 


Jabba the Hutt 
Template Type: Hutt Crime Lord 
Loyalty: To himself 
Size: 3.9 meters long 
Species: Hutt 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Nal Hutta 
Age: Unknown 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Alien species 5D, bureaucracy 7D, bureau- 
cracy: Tatooine government 9D+1, business 
6D+1, cultures 4D+2, intimidation 7D, lan- 
guages 4D, law enforcement 4D+1, law 
enforcement: Tatooine 9D, streetwise 9D, 
streetwise: Jabba's organization 11D 
MECHANICAL 3D 


PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 8D, command 8D, con 7D+1, gam- 

bling 7D+2, persuasion 7D+2 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 6D, lifting 6D, stamina 7D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Special Abilities: 

Force Resistance: Hutts have an innate defense 
against Force-based mind manipulation techniques; 
they roll double their Perception dice to resist such 
attacks. Hutts cannot learn Force skills. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 5 

Dark Side Points: 6 

Character Points: 26 

Move: 2 

Description: A hairless, bloated slug with 
quick, snakelike eyes, fetid breath, and a slobber- 
ing mouth. 

Background: Jabba the Hutt is among the 
most famous, but not necessarily the most pow- 
erful, ofthe Hutt crime lords. Heis crediting with 
forcing the various Hutt crime families to band 
together to form an unstoppable organization. 
His pudgy hand is in everything from spice run- 
ningto extortion to protection rackets stretching 
halfway across the galaxy. 

Personality: Bloodthirsty, ruthless, and alto- 
gether foul, with no redeeming qualities. 

Objectives: To remainin his position as numero 
uno in the region's crime syndicate. 

A Quote: "Bo shudda." 


Akkik 

Template Type: Jawa Henchman 

Loyalty: To Jabba the Hutt 

Height: 1.3 meters 

Species: Jawa 

Sex: Male 

Homeworld: Tatooine 

Age: Unknown 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Streetwise 5D 

MECHANICAL 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Con 5D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Droid programming 5D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 3 

Move: 8 

Description: Short, smelly, and covered com- 
pletely by a heavy, hooded cloak. 

Background: Mousey, even for a Jawa, Akkik 


Mos Eisley 


49 


Locations ooo | JĀ Rosen 
ااا ااج‎ ARS 


has always had a reputation for being a nasty 
little piece of vermin. His exploits in and around 
Mos Eisley soon earned him the respect of one of 
Jabba’s guards, who took it upon himself to 
proposethat Akkik join the guards. Jabba agreed, 
and fired him on the spot to make room for Akkik. 

Personality: Akkik is covetous, nasty, tricky, a 
coward, and talks a lot. Nobody can understand 
him (and Akkik is not his real name, anyway), but 
that doesn’t bother him a bit. 

Objectives: To work for Jabba as long as Jabba 
continues to feed him. 

A Quote: “Mop-lou dink dink hee, hee.” 


Gorrt 
Template Type: Gamorrean Goon 
Loyalty: To Jabba the Hutt 
Height: 1.7 meters 
Species: Gamorrean 
Sex: Male 
Homeworld: Gamorr 
Age: 24 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Melee combat 4D+2, melee combat: vibroaxe 
6D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Intimidation 5D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+1 
STRENGTH 4D+1 


Brawling 6D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 1 

Move: 9 

Equipment: Vibroaxe (STR+3D+1 damage) 

Description: This Gamorrean is green-skinned, 
with a pig-like snout, small horns and tusks, and 
powerful muscles. 

Background: Gorrt's innate skill as an en- 
forcer was not always recognized out in Jabba's 
palace beyond the Jundland Wastes. After a brief 
run-in with an uncooperative store owner, how- 
ever, Gorrt's "finesse" and skill were rewarded 
with a permanent post in Mos Eisley. 

Personality: Gorrt tends to be protective of 
Akkik, but generally loves to beat on anything 
that is smaller than him. 

Objectives: To be allowed to beat on other, 
weaker beings as much as he wants. 

A Quote: “Grunt!” 

The Hutt also owns the rectangular building 
behind the Townhouse, which serves both as 
barracks for his guards and as a garage. It has 
room for a small sail barge, an assortment of 
speeders, and posts along the rear to tie up a 
dozen Dewbacks or Banthas. 


Street Corner 
Preacher/Wreckage 


Mos Eisley was built around the wreckage of 
the colony ship Dowager Queen; what little re- 
mains of the ancient ship is still on display in the 
heart of the city. As the city grew and expanded, 
the central power and water distribution plant 
came to be recognized as the heart of the city, but 
the original blockhouses that stand around the 
wreckage attest to its age. 

As the site of the wreckage is city property, 
vagrants, hustlers and street preachers of all 
kinds have taken to staying in the vicinity of the 
area. Jawas gather shade under the wreckage, 
con men set up impromptu card trick tables as 
night and cooler temperatures come, and preach- 
ers find a space in the shade of a building and 


exhort the benefits of their religion. The most 
common preachers are Dim-U monks from a 
distant community called Oasis, who preach that 
Banthas are nearly divine creatures and that 
they present a perfect society that the residents 
of Tatooine should emulate. 

Here, in the heart of the old section of the city, 
there is constant bustle and hustle. Jawas scam- 
per about examining Droids and vehicles, aliens 
and spacers of all description come and go, and 
Mos Eisley’s residents struggle for daily survival. 
There are numerous traders who wander through, 
and if something is going on in the city, people 
will be in this area discussing the happenings. 


50 


Mos Eisley 


A 
"WA 


KCN Mos Eisley Cantina 


Located in the heart of the city is the infamous 
Mos Eisley Cantina. The building hosting the 
cantina was one of Tatooine's first blockhouses, 
designed as a shelter against Tusken Raider at- 
tacks. The assaults on the city never material- 
ized, and the building became an armory for the 
local militia. As Mos Eisley grew, the armory was 
moved, and the cantina went up for sale. Over the 
years it has undergone extensive modification 
and numerous owners. 

Thecurrent owner, a Wookiee named Chalmun, 
bought the building with gambling profits made 
while swindling visitors on Ord Mantell. Its cen- 
tral location has beena boon to smugglers, bounty 
hunters and others with business deals that must 
be conducted quickly. Now, the cantina is the 
place to meet freighter pilots who handle special 
cargo — anything contraband or illegal, from 
weapons, to spice, to Droids is fair game on the 
Cantina open-market “trading floor.” 


m 


221 


Mos Eisley 


Wuher, the bartender, is a non-communica- 
tive, ill-tempered local but he knows how to keep 
his mouth shut. The patrons are a fairly boister- 
ous lot who are used to the rough nature of the 
city; newcomers to the cantina are often given a 
hard time, but if they return after their initial 
visit, they are often tolerated. 

The cantina has no actual gambling tables (or 
permits), but there are always a half-dozen card 
games and other games of chance being played 
around the room. The cantina pays Jabba the 
Hutt for protection, and has very little trouble 
from the crime lord. The cantina is open all day 
and all night, every day of the year, even during 
official holidays. 

1. Entrance And Droid Detector: Entering 
from the bright glare of the sands to the elevated 
entranceway allows the bar patrons to check out 
the newcomers while they are still adjusting to 
the dim light. The new Droid detector is up and 


2, 


2 4 


d. dt. y 
» «jā 


LEED PT 
07 < 


U 
/ 
n = 


AR 
ARS 


Locations 


52 Mos Eisley 


running. Chalmun hates Droids, and won't toler- 
ate them in his building. 

The couches in this spot are for patrons wait- 
ingfor rides, although sometimes homeless Jawas 
make use of them (until they are shooed off). 

2. Booth (7): The booths in the cantina vary in 
size, shape, and capacity, in order to accommo- 
date large groups as well as intimate meetings. 
To handle the increasingly common overflow 
crowds, Chalmun added some free-standing 
tables in the bar area. The booths can handle 
about 40 patrons; busy times (which can occur 
any time of day or night) may find over 100 
individuals congregating in the cantina. 

3. Bandstand: Chalmun, after much coaxing 
from his employees, decided to add a live band, 
if only to discourage violence in the bar. He 
situated the bandstand close to the bar so that 
the bartender could make sure that the band was 
earning its keep. Currently, the seven-piece en- 
semble led by bandmaster Figrin “Fiery Figrin" 
Da'n is entertaining the natives. The band has 
just signed another two-season contract with the 
cantina. 

4. Back Hallway: This rear entrancetothe bar 
is left unlocked, allowing those with the knowl- 
edge and the need a way to escape. The three 
restrooms can be found at the bottom of the 
stairs. The cellar is also where the foodstuffs, 


Mos Eisley 


liquor, and ingredients for mixers are kept — in 
what was once a walk-in freezer. (The door, lock, 
and walls have a Strength of 4D.) 

There are at least three ways to get to the 
basement: the back stairs, the trapdoor in the 
office, and the access shaft in the power room. 

5. Office: Chalmun's office is a small, spartan 
affair. The office is separated from the bar by 
both a door and a simple curtained wall. There is 
a trapdoor here, leading to a ladder that de- 
scends to the basement. Chalmun actually keeps 
his daily receipts in the cellar, in a crate marked 
"explosives." 

6. Bar: The high-tech bar is capable of synthe- 
sizing virtually any drink known in this sector of 
the galaxy. The mixing computer knows 16,000 
drinks, but of course the cantina does not stock 
proper ingredients for all of the variations. 

The bar can comfortably handle twenty to 
thirty beings standing at the bar. It also contains 
a storage hatch in the floor leading to a shallow 
compartment, with enough room to hold the 
bartender's and band's valuables while they are 
on-duty and performing, respectively. 

7. Power Room: The power room holds a 
cranky Queblux Power Train, which has seen 
better days. It is wired to the fusion generator in 
the basement. It powers the lights, climate con- 
trol, the bar computer, and the mixing machines. 


= 
3 
ç 
= 
3 
& 
£ 


Locations 


John Paul Lona 


Brawling 6D 
TECHNICAL 1D+1 

Special Abilities: 

Berserker Rage: +2D to Strength. * 

Climbing Claws: +2D to climbing. * 

*See Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition, page 137 for 
more information. 


Chalmun 


Template Type: Wookiee Bar Owner 
Loyalty: To himself 

Height: 2.0 meters 

Species: Wookiee 

Sex: Male 

Homeworld: Kashyyyk 

Age: 157 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Blaster 3D+1, bowcaster 4D, dodge 
3D+2, melee combat 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Bureaucracy 5D, business 3D+2, in- 
timidation 6D, streetwise 3D 
MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 4D+1 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Bargain 4D+1, command 5D 
STRENGTH 4D 


Force Sensitive?: No 


Force Points: 2 


Dark Side Points: 1 
Character Points: 17 


Move: 12 


АВ 


ARS 


Eguipment: Bowcaster (4D damage), 
200 credits, datapad 


Description: A beige and gray-colored 
Wookiee, Chalmun has a scar which 
runs diagonally across his left pecto- 
ral muscle, beginning at his shoulder 
and fading out just below his chest. 


Background: Chalmun was a street 
tough as a youth, and quickly learned 
thathis height and weight usually gave 
hima distinct advantage in a brawl. He 
also learned that a good blaster can 
negate that advantage. 

The Wookiee has never had much 
need for saving money, and therefore 
lived from season to season on the 
profits from the cantina. 


Personality: The way Chalmun treats 
other beings reminds many people of 
aslightly dim older brother. He means 
well, but gets frustrated and often loses 
histemper. Chalmunis warmto people 
who can handle his rough affection, 
but hecan also be callous and cruel to 
those he doesn't know. 


Objectives: Continue on the quiet path 
toward retirement. 


Quote: (translated) “I don't care who 
those guys are. Kick them out; last 
time they were here, they roughed up 
some of my regulars." 


Cantina Regulars KNOWLEDGE 2D 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Vareth Astrogation 4D+1, starship gunnery 3D+1, 

DEXTERITY 2D space transports 4D 
Blaster 3D«2, dodge 5D PERCEPTION 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D Bargain 7D 
Alien species 4D+1, languages 4D STRENGTH 2D 
MECHANICAL 3D TECHNICAL 2D 


Astrogation 4D«1, communications 4D, 
space transports 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Con 5D+2, search 4D 


STRENGTH 3D 


TECHNICAL 2D+1 
Droid programming 5D 
Force Sensitive?: No 


Force Points: 3 


Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 11 


Move: 10 


DEXTERITY 3D 


Blaster 4D+1, dodge 3D+2 


Computer programming/repair 4D+1 
Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 0 


Character Points: 9 


Move: 8 
Description: Vareth is a slender Human, in her 
early twenties. Garron is a Sullustan who won't 


reveal his age. 


Background: Vareth and Garron have been 
buddies for years, ever since they met in piloting 


school. Garron's unique sense of humor, and 


Garron 


Vareth's wise-beyond-her-years knowledge 


quickly made them an inseparable team. 


When Garron's parents died in a shuttle crash, 


54 


Mos Eisley 


STA 
WA 


Sinthia Pulchatt 


Species: Kibnon 

DEXTERITY 5D 

Blaster 6D+1, dodge 5D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Planetary systems 4D, streetwise3D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 4D+1, starfighter piloting 
4D+2 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+1, gambling 5D 
STRENGTH 1D 

Climbing/jumping 4D 

TECHNICAL 3D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 1 

Character Points: 9 

Move: 11 

Description: A 2.8-meter-tall insectoid, 
Sinthia Pulchatt is a member of the 
species known asKibnon, adistantrela- 
tive ofthe Verpine. Kibnon are green in 


Oxbel 


Species: Devaronian 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Streetwise 3D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 4D+1 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 6D+1, con 4D+2, gambling 5D+ 1 
STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 4 

Move: 9 

Description: Oxbel looks the part of a 
typical Devaronian: a humanoid with 
razor-sharp teeth and a pair of horns. 


Background: Oxbell is the brother of 
Labria, a Devaronian who used to work 
for Slag Flats. Like his brother, Oxbell 
arrived on Tatooine with the intention 
of a holiday of gambling and having a 


—————M— M M 


Mos Eisley 


color, and look similarto a Praying Mantis, 
with bulbous eyes atop a slender stalk. 
Their four legs aid in stability to support 
their slender thorax and abdomen. Their 
arms are usually held up close to their 
bodies. 


Background: Sinthia Pulchatt is one of 
many Mos Eisley "spice merchants." 
Pulchatt was preened for this position at 
an early age, and fulfills her duties with- 
out question; she is a liaison between 
Jabba, and her boss, whose name she 
won't reveal. 


Personality: Pulchatt projects a kind and 
lofty attitude. Sheis exotic-looking enough 
to parlay that trait into a conversation 
starter; however, she is also looking for 
new spice customers, regardless of the 
harm the spice will do. 


Objectives: To become rich. 


A Quote: "Here, try some. It's only a little 
— it can't hurt you." 


good time. Also like his brother, Oxbell 
has yet to leave. 

Oxbell makes his living keeping his 
eyes and ears open to news, and selling 
that news to whomever would most like 
to hear it. His favorite spots are outside 
Docking Bay 94 and, more likely, either 
the Lucky Despot or the cantina. 

However, Oxbell lacks the talent and 
ambition of Labria: he spends more time 
downing lum than poking around for in- 
formation. If anyone asks, Oxbell is more 
than happy to explain, through slurred 
speech, that he is forced to drink from 
time to time to keep up his disguise. 


Personality: When he drinks (which is 
now a daily habit) Oxbell becomes alter- 
nately morose and chatty. He babbles 
incoherently about both public and pri- 
vate information. 


Objectives: Keep selling information so 
he can afford to drink. 


A Quote: "Damnable Gamorreans. Can't 


trust 'em. Hey! Spare a credit? I’ll let you 
in on some information." 


Mike Vilardi 


Mike Vilardi 


Mike Vilardi 


Beeyon Nace 


DEXTERITY 3D+1 
Blaster 4D+2, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 


streetwise 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D 


3D 

PERCEPTION 3D+1 
Bargain 3D, gambling 4D+1 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 3D 


Force Sensitive?: No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 4 
Move: 10 


society cut. 


he poured the insurance money into a freighter, 
the Startled Circuit. They borrowed the remain- 
der of what they needed to overhaul and refit the 
ship, and were soon outward bound. The duo are 
currently on Mos Eisley, looking for work. If the 
characters are in need of a ship, Vareth and 
Garron are available. 

Objectives: To pay off the loan they got in 
order to start their shipping business. 


Many consider Jawa Traders to be merely a 
more sophisticated version of a Jawa Sandcrawler: 
Jawa Traders repairs and maintains their Droids, 
but sandcrawlers make house calls. 

Traders is now owned and managed by a Jawa 
going by the name of Aguilae, who bought it out 
from another group of Jawas. Aguilae is not her 
real name, but it is a convenience for those who 
can barely manage Basic, much less the Jawa 
language. Aguilae is a scavenger who displays all 
the worst Jawa traits. She is filthy, ill-tempered, 
suspicious, and miserly. She employs only 
mechanicals because she doesn't trust organics. 
Due to her carelessness and lack of concern, 
Droid accidents are commonplace in the facility. 

However, Aguilae had a problem. As a Jawa, a 
technology hoarder by nature, she found it more 


Bureaucracy 5D+2, languages 4D, 


Astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation 


Computer programming/repair 5D 


Description: A heavy man of medium height and pale 
complexion. He is often wearing dark clothing of high 


Background: Beeyon Nace was a promising logistics 
clerk on Coruscant. One little indiscretion with the 


AR... 


ARST 


daughter of a ruling governor, and he 
was sent packing. 

His latest assignment is here on 
Tatooine, working for the Prefect, 
counting the freighters that come and 
go. The data is recorded in the space- 
port control tower. 

His resentment is growing and his 
patience is wearing thin. If plied prop- 
erly, such as enabling him to either get 
off-planet or to be transferred to a new 
assignment (or to a private company), 
he might just offer his extensive knowl- 
edge of the Imperial bureaucracy. 
Beeyon can usually be found lurking in 
the back of the cantina, nursing a drink 
in an otherwise empty booth. 


Personality: Beeyon is perpetually de- 
pressed. 

Objectives: To lose himself in drink. 
A Quote: “It wasn’t so bad that I got 


caught, but the fact that all I got to do 
was kiss her really bothers me.” 


Personality: Vareth is a practical young 
woman, with a great deal of trust and pride in 
Garron. Garron is expressive, a typical Sullustan 
trait, but can sometimes become morose over 
his recent loss. 

A Quote: “Sure, we can take you just about 
anywhere you want to go — as long as the price 
is right. Trust us.” 


EM Jawa Traders 


and more difficult to actually part with her Droid 
stock. As she found herself incapable of parting 
with the machines, she contacted the Squib Mace 
Windu, who is now a minority stock holder in 
Traders. Windu owed her money, and in ex- 
change for her forgiving the remainder of his 
debt, Mace paid into the company half of what he 
owed her. In addition, he agreed to help run the 
place for three-quarters of a season for the first 
three years, with the remainder of time to do with 
as he wished. For the next three years, he would 
only have to help out for half a season. He will be 
free and clear after the full six-year period. 

As a Squib, Mace would have liked a more 
complicated arrangement, but Aguilae would 
compromise only so far. Squibs hold few things 
as sacred as bargaining. Reproduction, explora- 


Mos Eisley 


—DARLL———————————————s"—————á——s l OCOS 
RS ee m 


"WA 


tion, conguest, and acguisition pale in compari- 
son to the Sguib haggling instinct. Telling a Squib 
that he is a good bargainer is the greatest compli- 
ment possible. 

Business has picked up, but the money situa- 
tion isn’t necessarily better. Aguilae is still a 
collector by nature, and Mace has his own pecu- 
liarities: his deals do not necessarily include the 
exchange of credits. 

Aguilae has been careful to steer him firmly in 
that direction after catching him completing a 
deal in which he offered a buyer from the Dim-U 
Monastery a protocol Droid if she would pay half 
the listed price in credits, and throw in her 
bosses’ old Cloud Car. Aguilae had to spell out to 
Mace that creditors normally want cash, not 
Cloud Cars which no longer function. Mace de- 
fended himself by explaining that he was going to 
have Spaceport Speeders fix the Cloud Car in 
exchange for buying it at three-fourths the going 
rate. That way, Mace would get the same profit as 
he would if he had voluntarily allowed himself to 
be bargained down to 80% of the Droid’s list 
price. Aguilae simply shook her head in disbelief 
and went in the back to count her Droids. 

Since that day Mace has tried to adhere to 
Aguilae’s policies. He feels guilty for misleading 
her about the simplicity of recent deals, which, 
despite his best efforts at restraint, are becoming 
more and more complex. 

On the business side of things, Traders has 
struck up a profitable relationship lately with 
Doctor Cornelius and his Cutting Edge clinic. The 
doctor’s requests are always for Droid parts, and 
always very specific. Aguilae doesn’t want to 
know what the parts are being used for. 


Mace Windu 

Species: Squib 

Height: 1 meter 

DEXTERITY 4D 

Dodge 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien species 4D+1, cultures 5D, languages 

4D, value 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Astrogation 4D+1, capital ship gunnery 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 7D, con 5D+2, search 4D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 5D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 10 

Description: A tiny, gray-furred biped with 
tufted ears. He wears a small cap adorned with 
tiny bits of metal serving no practical purpose. 


Background: Mace has been across the gal- 
axy, and is a wealth of useless trivia and 
misremembered facts on the multitude of spe- 
cies and planets in the galaxy. Mace agreed to 
help Aguilae run her Droid shop because he 
owed her money. He is loving every minute of it 
and is considering opening his own shop, but has 
no idea what to deal in. 

Personality: Mace seems to be an airhead. 
Actually he is a shrewd Squib, transacting busi- 
ness and judging the importance of things ac- 
cording to Squib values — the love of bargaining. 

Objectives: To honor the Squib tradition by 
achieving the most convoluted bargains possible. 

A Quote: “No deal. Try that again, and l'Il be on 
you like a Squib at a two-for-one sale.” 


Aguilae 

Species: Jawa 

Height: .9 meters 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 3D+1, dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Languages 3D, streetwise 3D+2, value 4D+1 

MECHANICAL 3D 

Ground vehicle operation: sandcrawlers 5D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Bargain 4D+2, con 4D+1 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, Droid 

programming 6D+1, Droid repair 6D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 6 

Move: 6 

Description: Aquilae is a typical Jawa, with a 
brown hooded cloak and an aversion to bathing. 

Background: When Aguilae acquired Jawa 
Traders, she had no idea how much it would 
occupy her life. Her fondness for Droids quickly 
became an obsession, and Mace Windu was the 
closest she could come to finding a reliable busi- 
ness partner. 

Personality: Aguilae is extremely suspicious 
of non-mechanicals. 

Objectives: To remain around Droids and other 
high-tech machines. 

A Quote: (translated) “I guarantee that this 
Droid is in good working order and of worth as I 
represent it.” 


Droids For Sale 


Jawa Traders has a number of vehicle and 
starship repair Droids simply because that is 
what the local market demands. 

These Droids are not types, but specific, indi- 
vidual Droids; as such, they often have higher 
skill levels or better equipment than stock Droids 


— ee 


Mos Eisley 


57 


would have. Note that skill bonuses listed due to 
eguipment are in addition to the skill values 
listed under each attribute. All Droids come com- 
plete with a restraining bolt and hand controller. 


R4-M17 
Model: Industrial Automaton R4 Agromech 
Droid 

Height: 1 meter 

Price: 750 credits (used) 

Move: 5 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

Business 2D, business: agriculture 5D+1, 

languages: computer languages 4D+2, 

languages: Droid languages 4D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Machinery operation 5D+1, repulsorlift 

operation 3D+1 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 4D+2, 

machinery repair 5D, machinery repair: 

moisture vaporators 6D+2, repulsorlift 
repair 4D 

Eguipped With: 

* Three wheeled legs 

* Video sensor 

* Two fine manipulation arms («1D to repair 

skills) 

e Arc welder (3D damage, «1D to repair 

skills) 

* Video display screen 

* Cybot acoustic signaller (Droid and 

computer languages) 

Despite theR series of Droids having a deserved 
reputation for co-piloting small space craft, after- 
market engineers discovered that the R4 series 
were quite suitable for numerous repair opera- 
tions. Almost identical to the R5 astromechs, the 
R4 series sports the Intellex III computer, capable 
of handling both Imperial Navy and Corporate 
Sector Standard transmission modes, although 
not as versatile as the Intellex IV in most R2 Droids. 
Its pair of fine manipulation arms allows the R4 to 
perform intricate maintenance or repair work, at 
the cost of flashier equipment such as an R2's 
holographic projector. 

This particular Droid, R4-M17, has seen better 
days. Its arc welder has an intermittent short (on 
a mishap result, the welder further damages the 
subject of an attempted repair, increasing the 
difficulty of subsequent repair attempts), and its 
third leg can no longer retract. Despite these 
flaws, R4-M17 would excel in a mechanic shop or 
farming community. 

R4-M17 is a quiet worker. She is stubborn 
when it comes to completing her assignments, 
and can sometimes be found in the middle of her 


Locations um — ——MÓ STAR 
کے‎ 


ARS 


off-duty time finishing up ajob that her owner has 
told her to abandon. She is also rather quiet for 
a Droid, content to let her work speak for her. 


EG-67 

Model: Veril Line Systems EG-6 Power Droid 

Height: 1.1 meters 

Move: 3 

Cost: 4,000 credits (rebuilt) 

DEXTERITY 1D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Languages: Droid languages 4D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

Energize power cells 5D+2 

PERCEPTION 1D 

Search 4D+2 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Capital ship repair 4D, machinery repair 5D, 

repulsorlift repair 4D+1, space transports 

repair 4D, starfighter repair 4D+2, systems 
diagnosis 5D 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Bipedal locomotion 

* Ultra-fine manipulation arm (+1D Technical 

skills) 

* System diagnosis package, including infra- 

red receptor, sonar, X-ray, and spectrometer 

eguipment (+1D to systems diagnosis) 

* Cybot acoustic signaller (Droid and 

computer languages; Droid may not speak 

Basic or other common languages) 

* Armored housing (+2D to Strength) 

Power Droids, as a subject, evoke remarkably 
limited interest. Many people consider power 
Droids to be simple mobile fusion generators, 
but the latest EG-6 is far more than that. 

In addition to fueling eguipment and vehicles 
when power grids are unavailable, the EG-6 ana- 
lyzes all power components and runs diagnos- 
tics associated with the equipment it is servicing. 
EG-6's sophisticated sensing equipment can de- 
tect flaws and wear long before routine mainte- 
nance checks normally pick them up. This helps 
reduce the number of potential breakdowns and 
dangerous explosions, as the EG-6 will not pro- 
ceed with refueling if the equipment falls outside 
of preprogrammed tolerance values. This pro- 
gramming has bestowed upon the EG-6 an unde- 
served reputation for stubbornness, but it is in 
the interest of safety. 

EG-67 is rather cranky for a Droid. His memory 
has been wiped quite a few times, usually hap- 
hazardly. This means he remembers snippets 
and pieces of former events and owners, but not 
enough to get a cohesive feel for his past duties; 
as a result, EG-67 tends to embellish and inter- 
weave these few scraps of memories into stories. 
Since his acoustic signaller is limited to complex 


Mos Eisley 


«ЯТА OCOS 
рз a oe 


"WA 


Droid languages (and not Basic or other common 
languages), he is only capable of relating his 
stories to other Droids — many of which haveno 
interest in the fanciful tales. 


WED15-D3 

Model: Cybot Galactica WED15 Treadwell 

Height: 1.6 meters 

Move: 8 

Cost: 650 (used) 

DEXTERITY 2D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

Languages: Droid languages 4D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Search 3D+1 

STRENGTH 1D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 4D+2, 

machinery repair 6D, repulsorlift repair 4D, 

space transport repair 4D+1, starfighter 

repair 5D«1 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Dual-tread locomotion 

* Fine manipulation arms («1D to repair 

skills) 

* Extensible video microbinoculars («2D to 

search for microscale work) 

* Various tools 

* Cybot acoustic signaller (Droid languages) 

One of the first commercially successful uses 
of treads for Droid locomotion was in the aptly 


Ši 


Mos Eisley 


named Treadwell model. The Cybot Galactica 
company managed to overcome the pitfalls in 
earlier tread designs by using a pair of heavy- 
duty treads powered and steered by a set of ten 
wheels, along with a chassis with a low center of 
gravity (avoidingthe problem of top-heavy Droids 
being unable to right themselves after a fall). 
The WED15 has been deemed “flighty,” but it's 
capabilities outweigh the personality. WEDI5's 
can be found almost anywhere on Tatooine's 
surface, repairing and maintaining all forms of 
equipment with microbinoculars that are un- 


Droid Key 
. Roche J9 Worker Droid 
. Arakyd BT-16 Perimeter Droid 
3. Demolition Droid 
. R4 Agromech Droid 
. WED15 Treadwell Droid 
. EG-6 Power Droid 


John Paul Lona 


matched in their capability to view fine detail. 
The Droid has a six-arm capacity along its single 
stalk, but most come equipped with fourto five of 
varying strengths and elegance. 

However, the arms are delicate, and they con- 
tinually get caught in machinery as the WED15 
passes by, obliviously hard at work repairingthis 
or that. Replacement arms tend to be of lower 
quality. Its vocabulator is restricted to binary 
languages. 

This particular Droid, WED15-D3, is capable of 
repairing virtually any vehicle or piece of ma- 
chinery. WED15-D3 is a suspicious Droid. Mal- 
treated and ostracized since first being placed in 
a job, it resents its perceived flighty personality 
and takes great pains (usually unsuccessfully) to 
counter the impulses which have been pro- 
grammed into it. 


LIN-D2D 
Model: Cybot Galactica LIN Demolitionmech 
Mining Droid 
Height: 0.7 meters 
Move: 3 
Cost: 800 (used) 
DEXTERITY 1D 
Blaster artillery 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
Languages 2D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Gambling 5D+1 
STRENGTH 6D 


TECHNICAL 3D 

Demolition 6D+1 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Dual-tread locomotion 

* Fine manipulator arm under dome (for 

planting explosives) 

* Cybot acoustic signaller (can only speak 

Droid languages). 

e Armored Housing («2D to Strength) 

TheLIN Droid chassis is based upon the familiar 
Cybot Galactica Treadwell design, but with a high 
density, reinforced durasteel dome. The awkward 
slowness of this mining Droid was a design tradeoff: 
in exchange for an almost-impenetrable armor 
shield, the Droid could plant mining explosives in 
the most dangerous caverns without concern for 
falling debris or corrosive soil. 

Alas, the LINs were prone to breakdowns re- 
sulting from the incredible moisture levels com- 
monly encountered in caverns and caves. When 
acharge a LIN was holding went off prematurely, 
causing a cave-in and the loss of ten miners, the 
Droids were pulled off the market. 

LINs can now be found scattered around a 
thousand worlds, performing tasks far beyond 
their original programming. This specific Droid, 
LIN-D2D, was first reprogrammed to serve as a 
data recorder for legal cases. Her second job was 
as a mobile entertainment system in a shipboard 
casino. Fitted with theatrical lasers, prerecorded 
music, and a level surface on top of the dome, she 
would synchronize a light show with music as 
she served drinks. And, using specially-equipped 
gambling tables, she would plug into the table’s 
computer terminal and gamble with patrons. 

LIN-D2D is currently programmed for use as a 
forward military observer. Her installed program- 
ming module is capable of linking up to common 
combat artillery. The Droid was due for a memory 
wipe, but this was forgotten in the panicky shuffle 
to sell it off before the lieutenant who devised 
this unauthorized experiment was demoted (or 
worse). LIN-D2D is reticent about revealing this 
aspect of her past, and instead discusses her 
previous experience as an entertainer. Not sur- 
prisingly, after five seasons she remains unsold. 


J9-6 
Model: Roche J9 Worker Drone 
Height: 1.9 meters 
Move: 10 
Price: 1,100 (used) 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 5D+1, bureaucracy 5D+2, 
languages 4D+1 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 4D+2, sneak 4D 
STRENGTH 2D 


ا 


60 


Mos Eisley 


m LOCATIONS 
RS ———————e 


"WA 


TECHNICAL 3D 

Security 5D+1 

Eguipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Bipedal locomotion 

* Olfactory sensor (+1D to odor-based 

search) 

e Torplex microwave sensor («1D to security) 

* Arjan vocabulator 

* TranLang II Communication module 

(«2D to languages). 

The Verpine, a highly evolved insectoid spe- 
cies, developed this remarkable unit. Named for 
the secondary species of the Verpine, the J9 
Worker Drone embodies many of the qualities of 
the popular 3PO-series protocol Droid. 

The J9 is equipped with a TranLang Il Commu- 
nication module, making it possible to under- 
stand over a million different languages. Its Arjan 
II computer is roughly equivalent in capacity to 
Cybot Galactica's AA-1 VerboBrain. 

The major difference between a protocol Droid 
and a Worker Drone is appearance. J9 Droids 
have insectoid eyes, and piston-like limbs. Their 
legs are even more awkwardly-jointed than a 
protocol Droid. If potential purchasers could get 
over theouter shape of the Droid, they would see 
that it performs almost as well, at two-thirds the 
price of, Cybot Galactica's offerings. 

Worker Drones are notoriously busy, although 
their ability to complete a job is sometimes in 
question. This Droid, J9-6, has seen his share of 
duty. He has developed a hyperactive twitch in 
his neck servomotors, which causes him to turn 
his head back and forth, as if alternating between 
one insectoid eye and then the other. 


LBT-16 
Model: Arakyd BT-16 Perimeter Security 
Droid 
Height: 2.3 meters 
Weight: 75 kilograms 
Move: 14 


Cost: 3,100 (refurbished) 

DEXTERITY 4D 

Blaster 5D+1, dodge 5D+1, grenade 5D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Languages 3D+1, law enforcement 4D+2, 

survival 3D+1 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Search 4D«1 

STRENGTH 1D 

Climbing 2D«1, swimming 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D+2, 

security 3D+1 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Six-leg locomotion 

* Sensor package: Carbanti motion sensor, 

fabritech seismic sensor (+10 to search) 

* Imperial standard comlink 

* Arakyd vocabulator (speaks Droid lan- 

guages only 

* TranLang | Communication module («1D 

to understand languages) 

* Armor («2D to Strength) 

* Taim & Bak Repeating Blaster 

Fire Arc: turret 
Range: 2-10/25/50 
Damage: 6D 

The BT-16 perimeter Droid is a reliable model, 
based on an arachnid design that has long been 
in service. Its six legs support the abdomen of the 
Droid in which most of the Droid's sensor con- 
trols are located, givingit far superior speed than 
a bipedal Droid design. It is capable of sensing 
almost any type of disturbance imaginable: its 
multiple sensors can even detect small animals 
burrowing in the soil underneath it. 

LBT-16, when it arrived at Jawa Traders, was a 
psychological mess. While in excellent physical 
shape, the Droid needed a complete memory 
wipe to overcome whatever traumatic experi- 
ence it had been through. 


KEN Heffs Souvenirs 


This store is, to put it bluntly, a junk shop. The 
shop offers an odd collection of old bannisters, 
ancient Holovid players, cracked hallway mirrors, 
decrepit baby cribs, and other assorted things 
which are of no real value to anyone except as 
curiosities. Behind the counter is a collection of 
unique souvenirs depicting local Tatooine sites. 
One is a glass bubble under which a water-filled 
diorama depicts the Jundland Wastes; if shaken, 
crystalline shards are stirred up to mimic a sand- 
storm. Another is a collection of purplish rock 
chips fused together, with the words “Mos Eisley” 


Mos Eisley 


drawn in glue and covered in sand. Yet another 
itemisatiny shard of pourstone, with a painting of 
the Mos Eisley cityscape. The outstanding offering 
isamounted, glazed Womp Rat. Other knick-knacks 
exhibit the same lack of taste. 

Of course, Tatooine's tourist trade is so small 
that no souvenir shop, especially with this cali- 
ber of merchandise, could make а profit. The new 
owner, Moplin (he bought the shop from Tebbi, 
Heff's daughter, after Heff was killed in an unfor- 
tunate incident involving bounty hunters a few 
seasons ago), makes his living not from the shop, 


Mike Vilardi 


Locations 


butthrough his forgery abilities. Theold Sullustan 
can forge false Tatooine township ID's for 100 
credits, false Tatooine passports for a minimum 
of 200 — docucards for other worlds are corre- 
spondingly more expensive because of the more 
difficult nature of getting a good forgery. Such 
forgeries normally reguire at least a full day's 
notice. Prices and times can fluctuate based on 
local demand, availability of suitable materials 
and other factors, so the prices above are merely 
general guidelines. 


AR... 
ARS 


Moplin Jarron 

Species: Sullustan 

Sex: Male 

Height: 1.4 meters 

DEXTERITY 2D 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Bureaucracy 4D+1, bureaucracy: Tatooine 

5D+2, business 6D, languages 4D+1, law 

enforcement 6D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+1, forgery 9D+2 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D, Droid 

programming 5D+2, security 4D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 9 

Description: Moplin is a middle-aged Sullustan 
(indicated by extreme wrinkles around the eyes), 
with an apparent distaste for cleanliness. 

Background: Moplin became skilled in forgery 
after a short stint in a prison colony for a "slight 
misunderstanding." The food rationing system 
forced him to come up with a skill with which he 
could barter with the other inmates for food. 

Personality: Moplin is a nervous little being, 
with a perpetual squint and hunched back. He 
laughs a lot, for no apparent reason. 

Objectives: Remain indispensable in Mos 
Eisley so that he can continue to indulge in 
"antiques." 

A Quote: "Well (hee), yes. I can do the job. 
Only a hundred credits." 


KDE Kaysons Weapon Shop 


Kayson's store has been in business for many 
decades, providing personal armaments to farm- 
ers, street thugs and anyone else with good 
credits. Kayson is a grizzled alien with atrocious 
manners and a seemingly sour disposition. His 
greatest asset is his ability to keep his thoughts 
to himself when dealing with customers. 

The shop is typical Tatooine construction. 
The interior walls are literally covered in new, 
used, ancient and modern weapons (all are kept 
empty and unloaded). Almost anything of a per- 
sonal nature can be found, but heavy artillery is 
unavailable. 

Kayson knows his weapons, and maintains 
them well. His reverence for them shows in the 
care and handling they receive. Because of the 


quality of his equipment, most everyone shops 
here. It is not unusual to see off-duty police 
examining the wares. 

Kayson attempts to maintain the appearance 
of a reputable business; however, his skills at 
acquiring contraband weapons, especially on 
this isolated backwater, are exceptional. Black 
market weapons have obscured identification 
plates, and customers can avoid officially regis- 
tering them with local officials. 


Item Cost 
Heavy Blaster Pistol 1,500 
Blaster Rifle 2,000 
Light Repeating Blaster 4,000 
Heavy Repeating Blaster 6,000 
Thermal Detonator 4,000 


62 


Mos Eisley 


STA 
WA 


Locations 


EM Dockside Cafe 


This building, adjacent to Docking Bay 92, is a 
small restaurant and bar that hosts numerous 
spacers. Like the Mos Eisley Cantina, itis a popu- 
lar meeting place for those who need to hire 
smugglers for unsavory business. While the 
Cantina generally attracts the most talented indi- 
viduals, those who are newer to the business 
(and thus, eager to take on more dangerous 
missions for lower fees) are known to frequent 
this location. 


The cafe is dimly lit, with many alcoves and 
booths for private conversation. There is no 
gambling to be had here, but there is a live band 
and several very attractive waitresses (always a 
morale boost for tired spacers). The bartender is 
a pokey, bitter Droid named CG-X2R; however, 
the Droid seems to take no notice of what hap- 
pens, so most spacers are more than happy to 
tolerate the complaining. 


EIS Docking Bay 92 


This docking bay is owned by Dom Antyll, one 
of the best starship mechanics in all of Mos 
Eisley. In fact, this bay is used almost exclusively 
for starship repairs, and inits underground rooms 
are all manner of starship repair tools, labor and 
engineering Droids and other items that Dom 
might need (Dom has a distrust of most organics 
and prefers to rely on Droid labor for assistance). 
Dom charges about 125% of what "average" me- 
chanics charge, but his work is first-class and 
guaranteed. 


Mos Eisley 


Dom Antyll 
Species: Human 
Age: 37 
DEXTERITY 1D+1 
Blaster 3D, dodge 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 
Repulsorlift operation 4D, sensors 5D, space 
transports 4D+2, starfighter piloting 5D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 5D«1 
STRENGTH 2D 


A Vu 222 


John Раш Lona 


У, 


63 


TECHNICAL 4D+2 

Armor repair 5D, blaster repair 5D+1, capital 

starship repair 6D, capital starship weapon 

repair 6D+2, repulsorlift repair 6D+1, space 

transports repair 9D+2, starfighter repair 

9D+1, starship weapon repair 9D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 15 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Comlink, fluid-spattered work suit, 
blaster pistol (4D damage), several cigarras, hat, 
any number of starship repair tools, datapad. 

Description: Dom always looks like he has just 
crawled out from underneath a leaking cargo 


There's not much to say about the "Spaceport 
Hotel" except that the quality of the service is 
about as imaginative as the name of the business. 
It's adequate and nothing else. There are about 
40 small rooms available for rent, each about 15 
credits a night (up from the 10 credits a few 


_ocations ooo Т JĀ Res 
M wars 


ramp: covered in fluid and grease, with sweat 
trickling down his nose. He is always chewing on 
a cigarra (he never smokes them), and all of the 
pockets in his work suits are full of tools. He looks 
tough and talks tough. 

Personality: Determined. He knows his busi- 
ness and doesn't like people questioning his 
abilities. If someone argues about the quality of 
his work, he doubles his price. If people pay his 
fee and get out of the way he is happy. 

Quote: *You don't think I can do it? Well, son, 
that just doubled the fee ... and tell you what: I’m 
the only person in this town who can fix that 
plasma transvertor. Pay or walk to Coruscant ... 
it's your choice." 


ЕЗЕШ Spaceport Hotel 


seasons ago). The beds are almost comfortable, 
the sonic showers work ... mostly, and the air 
conditioning unit works at least some of thetime. 
The Sullustan clerk doesn't ask questions, so he 
feels that customers shouldn't ask for favors. 


EEN Mos Eisley Spaceport 


Control Tower 


In the heart of the city, the Mos Eisley space- 
port control tower is responsible for directing 
incoming traffic to landing bays, and is one of the 
few structures in the immediate vicinity fed by 
the city's central distribution system. 

The tower consists of a single Sienar Observa- 
tion Module, which juts up five stories tall, and 
a two-story building that contains centralized 
administrative offices. The age of the tower can 
be verified by the ID plates showing "Republic 
Sienar Systems," predating the collapse of the 
Old Republic. 

The observation module is designed for up to 
six Droids, with accommodations provided for 
Humans to take over in an emergency. Only three 
stations are occupied at any one time (one by the 
J9-5 worker Droid and two by Human technicians). 
The modulealso has a landing beacon so all incom- 
ing ships can instantly get a fix on the city. 

When an incoming ship is detected by the 
spaceport's scanners, thecentral computer com- 
pares thetransponder code with the spaceport's 
database of pertinent data. Meanwhile, one of the 


operators (either a technician or the Droid) hails 
the ship, requesting the ship's name, previous 
port, purpose of visit and duration of stay. 

There are a large number of corporate-owned 
ports in Mos Eisley; these ports have pre-ar- 
ranged landing times and fees, and are respon- 
sible for their own customs inspections. If a ship 
identifies itself as being scheduled to land at a 
corporate bay, the tower quickly confirms the 
order with the company and then waves the ship 
through immediately, assigning a flight path. 
Companies will often send up escort vehicles, 
either cloud cars or fighters. 

If theship is scheduled to land in a private bay 
or doesn't have a pre-arranged bay, the landing 
procedure can take a bit longer. First, if a ship is 
landing at a corporate bay, the database search 
is cancelled; by landing at a private bay, a ship 
runs a greater risk of being caught for past illegal 
activities, although this is rare (see below). Sec- 
ond, if the ship has no pre-arranged bay, the 
tower assigns a bay, informing them of landing 
permit cost (normally about 20-40 credits a day), 


Mos Eisley 


Locations 


AV 


Nas Ам - " N К 
SS RRR N A ~ QE UN 
AES = S 


SN ie > ` " A Ў NS 
VE UC CUm 
JE SV 


John Paul Lona 


Mos Eisley 65 


But They'll Sail Right On Through Customs! 


Well, yes, they will. Almost any ship — illegal or not — 
will be able to pass the Mos Eisley Controllers unless, of 
course, they get JayNine-Five. This is consistent with 
preserving the feel of Mos Eisley as a lawless town. 

This situation is set up to facilitate deliberate story 
manipulation. It is easy to allow the characters to just 
breeze through customs if that is desired; if the characters 
need to be given a tough time, have JayNine-Five assigned 
to their ship. The characters, if they will be making fre- 
quent runs into and out of Tatooine, should probably glean 
the information about the Droid from older spacers at the 
local watering hole. 

Other spaceports around the galaxy have similar ele- 
ments which you can manipulate to allow as much or as 
little harassment as you please (perhaps a spaceport does 
nocomputer checking at all, but every othership is person- 
ally inspected by an orbiting customs frigate). Just remem- 
ber that just the threat of capture or harassment can often 
be as exciting as actually being apprehended, and avoids 
the monotony of, “What story do we tell the spaceport 
goons this week?" 


and the control tower informs the ship how long 
it has been cleared to stay in Mos Eisley (which 
seems to have no relation to how long the ship's 
captain actually wants to stay in Mos Eisley). 

After this, the tower sends the flight path 
coordinates and asks if the ship requires an 
escort — if so, the pilot must wait a few minutes 
foroneofthe beat-up tan cloud cars to escort the 
ship to the appropriate bay. 

At first glance, it seems that it would be unusu- 
ally easy for ships to be caught by the control 
tower. However, the spaceport's database of 
ships, restricted cargo types, wanted craft and 
other such pertinent data is incredibly slow. In 
addition, the central computer of the control 
tower is suspect: a few years ago it tried to have 
Moff Julstan's yacht impounded. As a result, the 
two technicians on duty often simply wait an 
appropriate amount of time, and then wave a 
craft through; J9-5 often keeps a ship in an orbit- 
ing holding pattern until the ship is cleared, 
unless the technicians overrule her and wave the 
ship through. If the computer detects a ship it 
deems questionable, the two technicians are still 
likely to wave it on through unless there is over- 
whelming evidence that the shipis guilty of wrong- 
doing; J9-5 will often demand a full investigation 
(she is almost always overruled on this too). 


Personnel 
The control tower is worked by two Human 
technicians and a Roche J9 worker Droid (the 
Droid is on duty at all times; there are three 
different technicians, so there are always two on 
duty). The technicians are unconcerned about 


their job: they only work hard enough to prevent 
mid-air collisions. The Droid, however, follows 
regulations to the letter, and thus is despised by 
most traders and smugglers who visit the city. 

The Droid despises the lackadaisical attitudes 
of her co-workers, but she has refrained from 
reporting it. The last time she attempted to, the 
two technicians on duty managed to unscrew her 
hip joints and she spent the next three weeks 
rooted to the spot until a maintenance Droid took 
pity on her and found her legs. Since that time 
JayNine-Five has used a mid-body support if she 
needs to stand for any length of time (several 
bolts are still missing). 

J9-5 

Model: Roche J9 Worker Drone 

Height: 1.9 meters 

Move: 4 

DEXTERITY 2D 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Alien species 5D+1, bureaucracy 4D+2, 

languages 4D+1 

MECHANICAL 1D 

Communications 3D, sensors 2D+1 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+2, sneak 4D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 2 

Equipped With: 

* Video sensor 

* Bipedal locomotion 

* Olfactory sensor 

* Microwave sensor 

* Arjan vocabulator 

* TranLang II Communication module 

Description: JayNine-Five is a Roche J9 Worker 
Drone of indeterminable age. She stands 1.9 
meters tall, and would fall over if not for a mid- 
body support which she leans on. She has 
insectoid eyes, and piston-like limbs. 

Background: JayNine-Five has been shuttled 
from owner to owner over the years due to her 
fussiness; she follows orders to the letter. She 
has finally found a job in which her punctuality 
and adherence to discipline is valued by her 
owner. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said 
for her spaceport control co-workers. 

Personality: JayNine remains a bit nervous, 
doing her best to ignore the antics of her bored 
colleagues. 

Objectives: To follow the rules of her job as 
exactingly as possible, and avoid her co-workers. 

A Quote: * Millennium Falcon, you are cleared 
to land. Do not deviate from your present course. 
Welcome to Mos Eisley." 


Mos Eisley 


STA 
WA 


ES Lucky Despot Hotel 


The Lucky Despot, in its original incarnation, 
was a battered cargo hauler; when the ship be- 
came so beat up that it failed all safety tests, its 
owners let it sit idle until investors, lured to 
Tatooine by the supposed potential for tourism, 
purchased it. Foolishly optimistic, they felt that 
if they only built a better hotel, beings from all 
across the galaxy would come to see the sights. 
They took the ship out of the docking bay in 
which it had been sitting for decades and carted 
it off to an empty lot. 

The Despot was sunk into the ground, with one 
deck below surface level and three above ground. 
It then was equipped with the best in entertain- 
ment and luxury facilities. A ground set of stairs, 
running from street level to the top deck, was 
installed with a retractable canopy. The round 
viewports were replaced with aquariums, each 
holding rare fish from a different world; a holo- 
graphic projector, called The Star Chamber, was 
installed in the casino. It was designed to show 
the galaxy in all its splendor, portraying a full- 
color map of the galaxy as seen from Coruscant, 
the Old Republic’s capitol. Deluxe carpeting, 
imported wood paneling and luxurious furniture 
was installed in each room. 

Alas, the anticipated influx of visitors never 
appeared, and the Lucky Despot owners were 
ruined. Years later, a young Whiphid named 
Valarian, with an eye out for new investment 
opportunities and looking for a new base from 
which to operate her growing criminal empire, 
greased a few paws and took over the hotel. 

Jabba had a vested interest in frustrating the 
Whiphid. Valarian discovered the ship had never 
been decommissioned and found herself paying 
tax on the property, as well as needing to keep up 
the required permits to operate a passenger 
liner. Next was the inexplicable difficulty in ob- 
taining a liquor license, then the impossibility of 
getting a gambling license (she still hasn’t re- 
ceived one). 

Never one to worry about official paperwork, 
Valarian opened anyway. Jabba retaliated with 
thugs, fire bombings, and legal wrangling. Valarian 
was stubborn, however, eventually learning the 
source of her problems; she now pays off Jabba, 
and promises to remain a small operation. In 
exchange, the crime lord alerts her to any planned 
police raids which attempt to nab her illegal 
gambling operations. To date, the agreement has 
held. Eventually, Valarian intends to upset the 
Hutt, but she is biding her time, marshalling her 
forces, and probing her enemy for weaknesses. 
When an opportunity presents itself, she intends 


Mos Eisley 


ГАЈ WEL. Г 


2 


to be ready for it. 

As for the Lucky Despot, Valarian has yet to 
pump any real money into it, and it shows. The 
Star Chamber celestial ceiling only partly works. 
The carpet is worn and faded. The first class 
staterooms are third-rate. Most of the rare fish in 
theportholeaquariums have died off. Most of the 
empty portholes have since been transformed 
into advertisements for local businesses and 
terrariums for native Tatooine life, such as ugly 
bone-gnawers and hideous gravelmaggots. 

On the plus side, the food is excellent. The 
walls are made of durasteel, riveted and kept 
gleaming. The walls of the top deck curve up 


John Paul Lona 


Locations um á À € STAR 


N — 


John Paul Lona 


The Lucky Despot 


Top Deck 


Lower Decks 


toward the ceiling, which has been replaced with 
a transparisteel viewport with a retractable 
canopy (the viewport is open at night for viewing 
the stars). 

Thereisastaff of 40 here, counting six Droids for 
maintenance, maid, valet and cooking service. 

1.Grand Staircase And Main Entrance Turbolift: 
This is the main entrance for all passengers and 


customers (employees use the service entrance). 
Both the staircase and the turbolift go only from 
street level to the top deck; those wishing to go to 
other decks on the Lucky Despot must use other 
turbolifts. Characters often have to watch out for 
R2-Q5, a clumsy waitering Droid that seems to fall 
down the stairs at least once a day. 

2. Ramp: Recently installed, most employees 
are still tripping over it. 

3. Front Desk And Lobby: Usually staffed by 
one of a pair of identical twins, passengers are 
often tickled pink when they finally figure it out. 
The pair, Anton and Sturn Brunwin, are attrac- 
tive humanoid aliens from Kiffu, with a penchant 
for swindling. Although Valarian hasn't yet no- 
ticed, the two have begun a money-laundering 
operation on premises. Guests are given pass- 
keys for the various turbolifts in the Despot. 
There are always three guards dressed in bright 
orange uniforms with hold-out blasters (3D+2 
damage) and comlinks (attributes of 2D, blaster 
4D, dodge 4D). 

4. Blast Door And Droid Detector: The broken 
Droid detector has not been fixed by Valarian. 
Despite common attitudes, she has no problem 
serving Droids (some of her best agents have 
been Droids), and in fact has six of them working 
at the Lucky Despot — without restraining bolts. 
The bar is even stocked with lubricant. When the 
shipis shut down for the night, the blast shield is 
lowered into position (Strength 7D). A door has 
been put in the shield, staffed by a security guard 
throughout the night. 

5. Gift Shop: This shop has countless garish and 
overpriced trinkets to remind visitors of the Des- 
pot, in addition to souvenirs that are from the Kuari 
Princess and other famous passenger liners and 
vacation spots. Costs are anywhere from 10 to 50 
credits for sculptures, shirts, holocubes and other 
momentos. The gift shop also stocks entertain- 
ment holos, medicines, toiletries, snack foods and 
other items that guests are likely to want. 

6. Manager's Office: The current manager, 
Venutton, is a wiry, nervous man. Obedient to 
Valarian for as long as she continues to blackmail 
him, he is an efficient manager and runs a tight 
ship. His office is small and ordinary. 

7. Valarian’s Office: Much larger and richly 
appointed, Valarian examines any interesting con- 
versations her observation devices have come 
across, in addition to plotting her schemes from 
this office. She is seldom in her office, as her 
criminal activities often take her away from the 
Despot. 

8. Public Communicators: These holovid 
booths are hooked into Mos Eisley’s city-wide 
communications system (each conversation 
costs .5 credits per minute). For extra fees, calls 
can be made outside the city limits (upwards of 


nn‏ د 


Mos Eisley 


STAR locations 


Valarian 
Species: Whiphid 

Sex: Female 

Age: 24 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Blaster 4D, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+2 
Business 2D, languages 
streetwise 3D+2, value 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
Repulsorlift operation 4D, spacetrans- 
ports 2D+2 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 4D+1, command 5D+1, con 4D, 
investigation 3D+2 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 5D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D 

First aid 5D, (A) medicine 2D+1 
Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 1 

Character Points: 12 

Move: 9 

Description: A young Whiphid, tower- 
ing and intimidating. 


3D+1, 


Background: Valarian seemed des- 
tined for a life of crime. The daughter 


1 credit per minute), including low orbit trans- 
mission to starships. Thesearea profit center for 
Valarian, as well as a font of useful information. 

9. Restrooms: Typical shipboard accommo- 
dations. 

10. Luggage Check And Staff Dressing Room/ 
Lounge: This open area is used by Valarian to 
keep tabs on her employees. It is rigged with 
various monitoring devices, controlled by a panel 
in her office. 

11. Service Turbolifts: These go to all levels, 
allowing staff personnel to move around easily. 
They are also emergency exits, although anyone 
who accesses them without appropriate pass- 
keys will trigger an alarm at the front desk. 

12. Turbolifts: АП turbolifts in the ship can 
accommodate up to six beings. Passkeys are 
required to summon or direct a turbolift. 

13. Lounge: This area is a meeting place for 
anyone involved in clandestine operations aboard 
ship. Strikingly boring, this area does have nu- 
merous booths for private conversations (unfor- 
tunately, the whole room is bugged). 

14. Star Chamber Café: The restaurant serves 
meals throughout the day, but once Second Twi- 
light is over, and the blast shield is lowered, it 
becomes Lucky Despot’s casino. The gambling 


Mos Eisley 


of two gangsters, she achieved a criminal 
record early. Once her parents were put 
behind bars, this freed Valarian to run 
away and really start moving into the big 
leagues. 

Her latest gamble, opening the Lucky 
Despot under Jabba’s nose, is paying off. 
He is leaving her alone to pursue her 
interests, and her interests include find- 
ing out what Jabba is up to. Being the 
second-best crime boss on Tatooine 
doesn’t bother Valarian. She knows that 
she will soon assume a larger throne. 


Personality: Valarian has a positive atti- 
tude. She has always succeeded in her 
varied interests and she has no reason to 
think she will fail in this goal. She enjoys 
the company of Droids and treats them 
as equals. 


Objectives: To destroy Jabba the Hutt and take over his 
business. 


Quote: “My goodness, stop blathering. I do not handle 
business like some other crime lords do. I think this can 
be settled quietly. I understand that the shipment was 
lost. Consider yourself on probation, and report for 
your next assignment. The value of the cargo will be 
deducted from your cut of this new shipment. This 
time.” 


tables are, for the most part, holographically 
projected onto existing tables. Cards and dice 
are hidden in the employee lounge so Valarian 
can claim they are employees’ personal effects. 
The games requiring physical devices are stored 
off the kitchen in empty food crates. 

15. Kitchen. All of the Despot’s food is pre- 
pared here, and corner crates hide gambling 
machinery by day. 

16. Linen And Support Services. Supplies, 
linen, and other common items are stored in 
these rooms. 

17. Function Rooms. These rooms support 
various activities, from business conferences, to 
guest entertainments, to rooms for private par- 
ties. They can be rented for 150 credits per day. 

18. Native Tatooine Sandcastings. Elaborate 
sculptures made from colored sands, adhesives, 
rocks, shells and other items found in the wilds of 
the Dune Sea, each sandcasting is considered a 
work of art, and they are quite popular among the 
trendy wealth mongers of the Core Worlds. These 
particular castings were made by a poverty- 
stricken artist, but are nonetheless beautiful. 

19. Guest Rooms. Guest rooms have single or 
double beds, entertainment consoles, and other 
amenities. They are comfortable by Tatooine 


John Paul Lona 


John Paul Lona 


Locations ooo STAR 
SES a as 


iherTatooine Bureau of Travel and Commerce Presents 


Enjoy the spectacle of an interstellar voyage 
without the expense, and without ever having to leave home ... 


The Cruise of a Lifetime! 


The Lucky Despot is your ticket to a 
fantastic weekend getaway. Permanently 
"moored" among the picturesque buildings 
of the oldest part of Mos Eisley (complete 
with on-site security), the Despot is an au- 
thentic decommissioned starship trans- 
formed into a fabulous dune-side hotel re- 
sort. Enjoy a starfaring voyage in home port 
— safely and in the greatest comfort — 
aboard the fabled Lucky Despot. 

* The exotic Star Chamber café features a 
unique starfield projector. Designed to rec- 
reate the galaxy in all its majesty and wonder, 
the holographic display projects a portion of 
the cosmos as seen from Imperial System! 
See planets and moons revolve in full color, 
at speeds of up to fifty times their normal 
orbits. Watch holographic comets fly right 
into your soup! 

* Visit our gift shop and pick up holocube 
mēmentos of your "journey": the Lucky Des- 
pot stocks holocubes from most major cruise 
lines. Let your friends think you were aboard 
the Kuari Princess. 

* The rumble of the hotel's food and water 
processing plant helps sustain the illusion of 
a ship's engine: you can actually envision 
yourself cruising effortlessly through the 
galaxy on a luxury yacht. All the excitement of 
a shipboard cruise for one-tenth the cost of 
those chartered "Galaxy Tours." * 


* Experience an authentic ship's stateroom. 
Each cabin is part of the original craft or was 
purchased from decommissioned "luxury" 
cruisers. The close quarters that early set- 
tlers might have experienced have been pains- 
takingly maintained to make your stay as true 
as possible. 


* Instead of endless sandy vistas, many of the 
ship's viewports have been transformed into 
aguariums, containing exotic fish from a 
score of alien worlds, while other viewports 
are now exciting terrariums — each hosting 
an unusual example of native Tatooine wild- 
life. Few residents have actually seen a bone- 
gnawer or gravel-maggot this close! 


This season, the 
Lucky Despot is proud 
to present an exclusive 
engagement of the re- 
markable acoustics of 
SySnootles andthe Max 
Rebo Band. Fresh off a 
multi-sector tour, they 
have returned to the 
lovely Despot for your 
entertainment. Their 
sound has been de- 
scribed as "the most 
original interpretation of 
a Sinfonia concertante | 
have yet to experience." 


There's a luxury stateroom waiting for you! 
*Registered galactic trademarks of Galaxy Tours, Inc. 


70 


Mos Eisley 


ŠĀ R ——— ———YJP—á—— o cations 
ARS ——Є———— 


standards, but primitive by the standards of 
most civilized systems. At 50 credits per night, 
they are overpriced. Some also come with cli- 
mate, atmosphere and gravity controls for the 
comfort of guests, although they are more expen- 
sive, and since they are left over from the original 
spacecraft's systems, old and sometimes unreli- 
able. 


Typical Lucky Despot Employee 
Template Type: Obsequious Waiter 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Dodge 4D«2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Cultures 3D, languages 4D+1 


Е Zygians 
Concern 


Little more than a branch office (the Zygian 
savings and loan corporate office is actually lo- 
cated on Treylon II), Tatooine's Zygian's building 
isintheheart oftheold section of Mos Eisley. Due 
to Mos Eisley's poor economy, the bank has 
slowly evolved into a pawn shop of sorts. Items 
left as collateral on failed loans have begun to 
clutter the vault area, forcing the officers to 
either consign the items to local shops or sell 
themthemselves. Consideringthefinancialstraits 


Mos Eisley 


MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D+2 

Con 3D+2, gamble 4D+1, sneak 4D+2 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-5 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Tray, drinks, menus 

Quote: “May I suggest the Ondo Lava '39. An 
excellent, full-bodied wine, with just a hint of 
Dewback spritz." 


Banking 


the branch office was in, they went into business 
for themselves. 

Despite its reputation as a pawn shop, Zygian's 
offers several features which makes it attractive 
to a potential customer. 


* A triple-lined vault. The safe has a computer- 
controlled timed entry, allowing access only twice 
a day, at second dawn and second twilight. The 
vault has a Strength of 8D, and a Very Difficult 
security total is necessary to pick the lock. Typi- 


John Paul Lona 


cally, there is a total of 200,000-300,000 credits in 
hard currency on deposit. 


* Just outside the vault proper is a selection of 
safe deposit boxes (Strength of 6D, Moderate 
security total to pick the lock). 


* Aloan rate of merely 15%. This is a far cry from 
thetypical loan shark rates of 300% or more. Not 
only is the interest rate much lower, but the 
"penalties" for missed payments are definitely 
less severe. 


The collateral required for a loan is typically 
twice the value of a loan. 

There aretwoclerks working at Zygian's: Sylvet 
Depp (brother of the late Prefect Depp), and an 


Locations e—————————À———X'ÀÓ—— STAR 
——— um 


ARS 


attractive near-human female named Debrelle. In 
addition, there is Givvers, the manager, a full- 
time maintenance Droid and two bank guards, 
who alternate shifts (attributes of 2D, blaster 
4D+1, dodge 5D, search 4D), with a blaster pistol 
(4D damage) and a datapad/comlink that imme- 
diately alerts the militia when a specific keycode 
is entered. 

One large meeting room has been turned into 
the pawn shop. An additional part time staffer 
works here, helping customers. 

Historically, there has been little trouble in 
Mos Eisley insofar as bank heists are considered. 
Residents who misrepresent themselves and skip 
out on loans, however, are a steady problem. 


Police Station 


With the added attention Tatooine received as 
a result of Lord Vader's efforts to capture stolen 
technical plans, Mos Eisley's Prefect Talmont 
has found himself expanding the size of the po- 
lice force. Formerly, Mos Eisley relied exclu- 
sively upon a small part-time militia and half a 
dozen stormtroopers to keep order. Now, 
Talmont has added a full-time police force (small 
asitis at only 20 officers), and increased the size 
ofthe militia. However, the larger force required 
room for numerous speeders and related equip- 
ment, necessitating the purchase of a building in 
one of the newer sections of the city. 


Police Station 


Despite new facilities and increased funding, 
the militia-turned-police are laid-back about crime 
and corruption. The roof of the main building is 
flat, and contains a marked landing pad designed 
for air speeders and cloud cars; there is a ladder 
leading to the ground. 

Patrol officers are not assigned desks because 
they use personal datapads to process informa- 
tion about arrests and complaints. Since Tatooine 
residents all possess I.D.'s, a simple swipe of the 
card through the datapad brings up all records 
on that inhabitant, including address, closest 
family members, and other pertinent informa- 
tion. This enables patrol officers to operate in an 
independent fashion. 

1. Desk Clerk: From here the desk clerk has 
monitors enabling him or her to watch all four 
holding cells, the entrances to the building, the 
roof, the basement, and the corridors. Monitors 
here display the same information as those at the 
duty station (location 12). All building entrances 
are equipped with sand traps. The door leading 
into the station proper can be locked from the 
desk clerk or the duty station, has a Strength of 6D 
and the lock requires a Moderate security total to 
pick without triggering an alarm. 

2. Fines And Permits Office: Parking fines, 
moving violations, vehicle permits and other 
minor offenses are handled out of this office. 

3. Property Room: All property confiscated 
from suspects is held here until given back to the 
owner, or released as evidence to a trial court. 
Here also is where suspects have their retinas 
scanned and catalogued, and their imaged holo'd 
for police mug shots. 

4. Detective Offices (5): These offices are 
designed for the detectives assigned to Mos Eisley. 
Currently, there are two empty offices. 


Mos Eisley 


eT R oc tis 


"WA 


5. Chiefs Office: The Chief of Police, Lieuten- 
ant Harburik, has a corner office. He prefers a 
hands-on approach, however, and can rarely be 
found behind his desk; he does carry a comlink 
with him at all times so he can be contacted if 
necessary. 

6. Ouestioning Room: This room is used to 
guestion, or if necessary, interrogate suspects 
and criminals. It has a security door, with a 
keypad required for entry. (Easy security total to 
pick the lock.) 

7. Visitation Room: This room is now bisected 
by a sheet of transparisteel. Microphones allow 
communication between a suspect and the visi- 
tor. The wall has a Strength of 3D, so it isn't truly 
an obstacle to those determined to break out. 

8. Locker Rooms, 9. Rest Rooms (2): There are 
two sets of changing rooms and sonic showers 
for the officers, along with access to the public 
rest rooms. 

10. Security Doors (2): These reinforced doors 
have a keypad for entry (Moderate security total 
to pick the lock; Strength of 6D). 

11. Perimeter Alley: This curved hallway is 
two steps lower than the main floor. This is the 


sole method of access to the cells. 

12. Duty station: From here the duty officer 
can watch all four holding cells. This station is 
elevated above the main floor. 

13. Cell (4): Lower than the main floor are four 
holding cells. The cells include reading lamps, a 
bunk, rest room facilities, and a mirror. Atthetop 
of the wall, facing the duty station, each cell has 
a one-way transparisteel mirrored window, to 
allow the duty officer to physically view the 
entire cell. (These tiny windows have a Strength 
of 6D.) The opposite wall is composed of iron 
bars with a Strength of 4D; the lock only requires 
an Easy security total to pick. 

14. Speeder Parking: This lot accommodates 
the patrol scooters, as well as the police officer's 
civilian transportation. 

15. Ladder: This ladder goes from the roof 
speeder landing pad to the speeder parking lot. 

16. Speeder Ramp: This is a sloping ramp 
leading down to the basement of the building, 
which has the speeder maintenance garage. The 
ramp has a sand trap "cover" protecting the 
cellar from sand. Thereis a full-time mechanic on 
the payroll. 


EZMThe House of 
Momaw Nadon 


Momaw Nadon's home represents a typical 
upscale Tatooine residence. The opulence is 
obvious in the incredible amount of water the 
Ithorian utilizes. Indeed, the house is almost a 
miniature ecosystem. Momaw Nadon's home lies 
at the cul-de-sac of a quiet "street," formed by 
two long residential buildings, on the southern 
edge of the city. From the outside it looks fairly 
ordinary, with the typical two-story white 
pourstone construction; the ecological wonder- 
land inside is a different story. 

The humidity is the first thing to hit a visitor. 
The insulated walls have actual condensation on 
them. The water originates from an artificial 
pond in the center of what would normally be an 
entertainment area. Wildlife of all kinds inhabit 
the forested room, with a majority of the water, 
flora and fauna spilling over into the living room, 
in the first subterranean level below. 

The windows in the house are all very near the 
ceiling, and diffused. There is no direct light 
which hits the plants. This keeps the tempera- 
ture down, and mimics the diffused light which 
penetrates theoverhead canopy of Ithor's jungles. 

Few have entered his abode, and none without 
an invitation. He performs all the maintenance 


Mos Eisley 


duties by himself: fertilizing the soil, feeding the 
animals, and changing the water purifier filters. 

Momaw has several carnivorous plants to scare 
unwanted visitors. One particular plant, a 
Vesuvague Hanging Tree, is semi-intelligent. 
Momaw has stationed it over a secret room in 
which Rebel agents seek refuge; it listens to 
Momaw's commands and will attack on command. 


Vesuvague Hanging Tree 
DEXTERITY 5D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 4D+2 
Attacks: 
Vines (4D+2 damage) 
Digestive juices (6D+1 damage) 


Momaw Nadon 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Dodge 4D, melee combat 3D+1, melee 
combat: powerstaff 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 
Cultures 4D+2, survival 3D+1, survival: 
jungle 5D 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 
Repulsorlift operation 4D+1 


_ocations ce STAR 
ss NN" 


PERCEPTION 3D+1 

Bargain 4D+1 

STRENGTH 3D 

Lifting 4D 

TECHNICAL 2D+2 

First Aid 4D+2 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 9 

Equipment: Agri-kit (+10 to survival), 
powerstaff (STR+2D damage) 

Description: An Ithorian of some age and grace, 
Momaw has a sandy-brown color, typical of 
Ithorians who spend a great deal of time away 
from their homeworld. His dual-throated stereo 
voice is unmistakable. 

Background: Momaw was herd leader of 
Tafanda Bay, a grand visitor center on his 


homeworld. When the Imperials demanded the 
agriculturalsecrets oftheIthorians, Momaw knew 
that to refuse would mean the destruction of 
Tafanda Bay, and the loss of many lives. He 
complied and the Ithorians banished him. 

Momaw moved to Tatooine to nurse his pride. 
Once there, he set up contacts with the Alliance. 
He also fell in love with Slag Flats, a Tatooine 
settler and one of theoriginal colonists. Since her 
death, he has slowly realized he was using Slag as 
a diversion from his feelings. He knows the time 
is nearing when he must return to the Mother 
Jungle and prove his value. 

Personality: Momaw is a lonely Ithorian, in 
self-inflicted exile. He speaks softly and is a very 
gentle being. 

Objectives: To regain his place among his 
people so that they agree to his anti-Imperial 
position. 

A Quote: "Sometimes one must turn the soil to 
save the garden." 


ЕЗ Transport Depot 


s 
2 
E 
3 
Н 
ё 
< 
£ 
SF 


74 


The transport depot is a decrepit and unsafe 
building not far from the center of the city. The 
west end of the large building has a cafe, serving 
waiting passengers overpriced and undercooked 
food; the east end offers the ticket booth and rest 
rooms. The center area has chairs arranged in 


rows, with several video monitors to catch the 
latest Tatooine broadcasts; only two of the moni- 
tors actually work. Since Tatooine’s lone broad- 
casting station closed down years ago, all infor- 
mation on the airwaves is on disk, and the prere- 
corded commercials and programs are brought 


Mos Eisley 


TO Ro LOCATIONS 
کم‎ zz En 


WA 


in once a month. The cost is one credit per ten 
minutes. 

There is a bank of lockers along the back wall, 
of varying sizes. They can be rented for 4 credits 
a week, or 1 credit per day. They use a key lock, 
with an Easy security total to pick the lock. Near 
the front door is a set of videophones with a 
maximum range of near-orbit (as long as there 
are no sunspots or sandstorms). 

The proprietor of the depot is a near-Human 
named Yvonne Targis. She is a nasty yellow- 
skinned spinster of some unknown age. Her hair 
hangs down in wisps from the green bun atop her 
head, and her nails are often jagged. 

Yvonne works for Jabba the Hutt. Some valu- 
able objects are dropped off by smugglers at the 
depot, until one of Jabba's cronies picks it up. 

Thedepot offers transportto almost any settle- 
ment on Tatooine, although that isn't saying 
much. The company purchases whatever be- 
comes available, so transports include tourbus 
speeders, sail barges, and cargo haulers. 

The following routes and times assumes a 
thirty minute layover at each stop, with trans- 
ports available every three days. The transport 
makes a complete loop, returning to Mos Eisley 
(includingthe Anchorhead *Circle Route" around 
the Jundland Wastes); the direction of travel is 


Е The Cutting Edge Clinic 


Welcome to a clinic run by a doctor with 
outstanding warrants on over 53 planets. A doc- 
tor who has been given the death sentence in 14 
systems. This scourge ofthe galaxy is none other 
than the infamous Doctor Evazan. 

Under the name of Dr. Cornelius, this evil man 
runs an office out of a nondescript building in the 
heart of Mos Eisley. 

The shop is a four-room affair. The reception 
room is a tiny area containing little more than 
four chairs and a receptionist. His clerk is a 
Devaronian named Jubel. 

The clinic specializes in cyborging, but the 
operations are seldom successful. The deranged 
doctor has even used Droid parts instead of 
cybernetic equipment upon occasion. Normally, 
his patients, often desperate and destitute smug- 
glers, ship hands and other transitory individu- 
als, disappear after his failed operations, and the 
authorities haven't thetime or inclination to look 
into the matter. 


Doctor "Cornelius" 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Blaster 4D+2, brawling parry 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 


alternated with each journey. For every stop, the 
ticket costs 2 credits. Therefore, going from Mos 
Eisley to Bestine when going west to south costs 
2 credits, but going south to west costs 8 credits. 
Thetransports arerarely on schedule, and some- 
times the whole run is cancelled. Yvonne's house 
rule is that there must be at least four beings 
wanting to ride in order for her to allow the R2 unit 
driver to leave the terminal. Of course, she blames 
engine trouble or sandstorms on the “delay.” 


Routes and Times 
South to West 


Location Arrive Leave 
Mos Eisley — 09.00 
Anchorhead 10.50 11.20 
Motesta 13.40 14.10 
Arnthout 16.15 16.45 
Bestine 18.20 18.50 
Mos Eisley 20.20 

West to South 
Location Arrive Leave 
Mos Eisley — 09.00 
Bestine 10.30 11.00 
Arnthout 12.35 13.05 
Motesta 15.10 15.40 
Anchorhead 18.00 18.30 
Mos Eisley 20.20 


Business 3D, languages 4D, streetwise 4D«2 

MECHANICAL 2D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 4D+2, starfighter 

piloting 3D«2 

PERCEPTION 2D+1 

Bargain 3D+1, con 4D+1, gambling 3D+2 

STRENGTH 3D+2 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D 

First aid 5D, (A) medicine 1D, (A) medicine: 

cyborging 2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 6 

Move: 10 

Description: A medium-built man, whose most 
startling aspect is his twisted, squinty-eyed face. 
His stilted speech and obnoxious manner con- 
tribute to his loathsome appearance. 

Background: Dr. Cornelius is none other than 
the infamous Dr. Evazan, scourge of the galaxy. 
His obsession with surgical cutting and sewing 
has caused untold death and horror. His narrow 
escapes are the stuff of legend. His return to 


= ĖĖĖ—— 
Mos Eisley 75 


Locations 


Tatooine in the dead of night is bad news for 
anyone unlucky enough to come under his knife. 
Heis hiding from his Aqualish companion, Ponda 
Baba, who was nearly killed by one Evazan's 
failed cyborging operations. 

Personality: Evazan is as twisted as his coun- 
tenance. Although he can assume the attitude of 
a concerned doctor, the moment the patient is 


AR 
ARST 


asleep the maniacal laughter of the doctor is 
proof enough of his insanity. 

Objectives: To keep practicing his creative 
surgical procedures. 

A Quote: “Yes, I understand how important 
good looks are. Now, here is the hand that will be 
installed.” 


Е Dim-U Monastery 


Visitors to Mos Eisley are quite likely to encoun- 
ter street preachers praising the wisdom and per- 
fect nature of the Bantha. These preachers are 
from a “model” community out in the wilderness 
run by monks of the Dim-U religion. However, there 
is a splinter group with a monastery in Mos Fisley 
itself; this group has no street preachers, but those 
who would seek enlightenment and aid may ap- 
proach the monastery. 

Both groups are opposed to the continued ex- 
pansion of settlements that encroach upon the 


Transponder Codes 


Every ship in the civilized portions of the galaxy is 
equipped with a transponder code: a unique signal beamed 
out continuously to identify each ship. The code includes 
the ship’s name, type, owner, and any pertinent data about 
the ship. This code is built into each sublight engine, and 
is created by giving slight variation to the frequency of the 
engine’s emissions. This variation, as well as data about 
the ship, is encoded in the transponder director that is 
sealed into the engine itself. This information is regulated, 
handled and dispersed by the Bureau of Ships and Services 
(BoSS). 

There are three ways to alter transponder codes. The 
easiest is to replace a ship’s engines with engines from 
another ship, hopefully one with a cleaner record. A sec- 
ond way is to have false transponder codes installed in an 
engine. When the ship is scanned, it will be identified as a 
completely different vehicle — this is a tricky, expensive 
forgery, for if the attempt is failed, the transponder will 
often melt the engine’s internal components down, ruining 
it. The final, and even riskiest, approach is to actually 
tamper with BoSS's files directly. This is very difficulty 
because the codes are in an almost indecipherable code. 
However, Drayk has learned how to tamper with decoded 
files, making this process much simpler. 

Agents from BoSS are reputed to be incorruptible; Jabba 
the Hutt has found this to be largely accurate. BoSS’s 
Tatooine agents were long ago approached by Jabba the 
Hutt; the gangster received no special deals, but was 
offered the opportunity to purchase any information he 
desired, on par with other governments. 


Bantha’s traditional foraging grounds, including 
the introduction of new industry. Other than that, 
the two groups seldom associate with each other. 

However, the monastery has a much more 
sinister truth. The building, despite the asser- 
tions of its “abbot,” was chosen for its low rent, 
low visibility, and proximity to the Mos Eisley 
Bureau of Ships and Services (BoSS) office. The 
Dim-U monastery is a cover for a criminal group 
that actively spies on the BoSS offices, and opera- 
tives make a small fortune forging transponder 
codes for wanted starships. 

The building was an abandoned greenhouse 
that the Dim-U sect offered to refurbish at no 
cost. Drayk, the abbot of the Monastery, is a 
shrewd deceiver. He changes both the location 
and facade of his organization every few seasons 
and since his last front was a Bantha stable, he 
had enough visits from the Dim-U clergy to fake 
an organization based on their religion. The con- 
stant harping and harassment about ecological 
concerns for the Banthas, along with the ongoing 
religious disagreements with Oasis, insures that 
the focus of attention is on the antics of the 
monastery, and not the monastery itself. 

Fromthe crypts ofthe monastery, corrupt agents 
tap into the datafiles of the local BoSS office and 
monitor the transmissions from the office. Every 
six months a BoSS ship drops out of hyperspace 
and orbits Tatooine just long enough to receive the 
updated transmissions from the office, and for the 
office to download updates from the rest of the 
galaxy. The BoSS ship then kicks back into hyper- 
space to continue its route. These transmissions 
are decoded for review prior to transmission — it 
is during these times that Drayk’s slicers break into 
the BoSS computer system, altering, adding or 
deleting data as necessary. 

The monastery employs a group of mechanics 
who can pull apart a sublight engine in order to 
alter its transponder codes. His mechanics work 
in complete secrecy, and normally only at night 
for added protection. If a ship is too large for a 
landing bay, aspecial expedition can bemounted 
outside the city, but of course, at extra cost. 

This all costs money — payment in advance. 


— el 


76 


Mos Eisley 


TA 
"WA 


Dim-U Monastery 


This payment plan might startle newcomers to 
the business, but Drayk has no need to swindle a 
prospective purchaser. For a file change, with no 
engine workinvolved, Drayk usually charges 5,000 
credits (although if a ship is particularly infa- 
mous, such as the Millennium Falcon, the cost is 
much higher). 

For custom jobs requiring dismantling a ship's 
engine to change the transponder director, the 
fee begins at 5,000 credits (for the file change) 
and goes up from there. A typical Corellian light 
freighter might be another 5,000-10,000 credits, 
whileany Mon Calamari ship — each as unique as 
its designer — might run as high as another 
100,000 credits. 

Drayk is aware that some of his business can 
only be attributed to Rebel activities. He has no 
position on the civil war, but does appreciate the 
added profits it brings him. Drayk is also very well 
connected —hecan put a customer in contact with 
gunsmugglers, forgers, bounty hunters, hired guns 
or any other questionable service. 

1. Main Entrance: The huge doors are rarely 
opened. Instead, visitors are guided to the smaller 
adjacent gate. 

2. Underground Lobby: This roomis accessible 
only from theturbolifts. This is the entryway to the 
illegal aspects of Drayk’s operation. Two monk or 
nun guards are hereatall times, armed with hidden 
blasters. They prefer to discourage unwanted visi- 
tors, rather than directly challenge them. 


Mos Eisley 


3. Rest Rooms. 

4. Workshop (7): Here the technicians work 
on modifying transponder codes by rebuilding 
or modifying ship transponder directors. 

5. Conference Room (Level 1), Tech Room 
(Level 2): The conference room can hold 18 
beings, and sports a burnished table which holds 
the latest in holographic projection technology. 

The tech room is the nerve center of the 
complex. It is from here that the actual BoSS tap 
is achieved. This room of computer equipment is 
hooked into several relay satellites on the roof of 
the building, concealed among older debris. 

6. Workshop (Level 1), Abbot’s Office (Level 
2): This room is a standard workshop on the first 
level. The second holds Drayk’s office. He pos- 
sesses a system of cameras hooked into various 
strategic locations about the monastery. 

7. Guest Parlor: Here the occasional visitor is 
entertained. This room is a spartan version of a 
hotel room, complete with two double beds and 
bathing facilities. Drayk has a key to this room. 

8. Cell (12): These are the individual rooms for 
the nuns and monks of the monastery. A typical 
room has a bed, dresser, video comlink, and 
entertainment console. 

9. Quiet Room: According to the Dim-U, this is 
a room for reflection and introspection. It is 
actually a game room, with a holochess game, as 
well as an auto-pool table and gooth ball court. 

10. Abbot’s Quarters: These rooms are off- 


John Paul Lona 


John Paul Lona 


Locations 


Ф 


limits to anyone but Drayk. Не сап control all the 
eguipment in his office from here. He employs an 
Industrial Automaton SE-4 Servant Droid named 
R02-E. 

11. Scriptorium: Here is stashed the com- 
puter memory banks for all work that the monas- 
tery has performed over the years. lt is con- 
stantly backed up and older storage modules are 
copied and updated onto new media. There are 
high explosive charges rigged all about the room, 
which may be triggered from the abbot's quar- 
ters or abbot's office. If necessary, Drayk has no 
compunction about destroying all records since 
he has complete back-ups hidden somewhere, 
although he won't reveal where (or even if they 
are on Tatooine). 

12. Bantha Stable: A collection of six sorry- 
looking Banthas mill about here at night. By day 
they remain penned in a corral built against the 
outside east wall. 


The Forger's Art 


How difficult is it to completely change a smuggler's 
identity and ship information? The short answer is: it 
depends. It may take a while — "Sure, I can give you new 
1.0.5, but your Droid, see, I don't do Droids. A friend of mine 


on the fifth moon, however..." 

On the other hand, it can be a brief, painless, but 
nonetheless expensive process. The amount of time and 
hassle can easily be customized to fit the adventure at 
hand. 


АВ 
ARS 


% 
7 7 


A 
BE ЛОРУ СУ, 
7 G Й 


А 


А 


ЭЭМ 


УММУ 


IN 


Bantha 


DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 8D 

Orneriness: 2D 

Move: 15 

Size: 2.5 meters at the shoulder 

Attacks: 

Horns: 7D damage 
Trample: 8D damage 

Banthas are commonly used as beasts of bur- 
den. The rare Bantha that has been trained for 
combat will attempt to trample, but most are shy, 
fighting only when necessary. Banthas can carry 
about 500 kilograms of cargo, or up to five beings. 
The six Banthas at the Dim-U Monastery are 
domesticated, and will flee when frightened. 

13. Kitchen And Refectory: A substantial 
kitchen and dining area were modified from the 
original equipment left here. Much of the pro- 
gramming and hookups are unorthodox, but 
ELGaR — an LGR series Industrial Automaton 
Cooking Droid — manages to keep everything on 
this side of disaster. 

14. Bell Tower: This equipment used to power 
the boom, which is now stationary and juts out 
over the nursery pits. The machinery here was 
converted to a simple signal tower which chimes 
each hour on the hour. 

15. East Gate: This gate is never used. In fact, 
everyone has forgotten it exists. It is sealed and 


س 


78 


Mos Eisley 


—S TA R locations 
RE Aaaa 


"WA 


Drayk 

DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Dodge 3D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 

Bureaucracy 4D, business 5D, lan- 
guages 4D+2, law enforcement 4D+1, 
streetwise 6D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift operation 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 7D+1, con 6D, forgery 9D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Computer programming/repair 3D, 
repulsorlift repair 2D 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 14 

Move: 3 

Eguipment: GoCorp hoverscooter, 
datapad, comlink, blaster pistol (4D 
damage) 


Description: Drayk uses a GoCorp 


has a Strength of 5D. 


hoverscooter to get around. He has a 
penchant for clothes which suggest a 
military style. 

Background: Drayk, theabbotoftheDim- 
U monastery, is guite a jump from the 
political clerk of yesteryear. After a 
speeder accident left him paralyzed from 
the waist down, Drayk stopped chasing 
short-term goals and set out to build a 
personal fortune. Drayk has an unchar- 
acteristic soft spot for those he thinks 
areintrouble through events not of their 
own making. Being what he calls *a vic- 
tim of circumstance" himself, he will go 
out of his way to correct a wrong. 
Personality: Draykis a very calm man who 
plans as far ahead as possible, and has at 
least three contingencies for every prob- 
lem.Heisunruffled by mostturns of events, 
and the only time he gets excited is at the 
thought of an unhappy customer. 
Objectives: To get rich. 


A Quote: “The job will cost 5,000 credits." 


Body Strength: 2D 


16. Pulpit: This gantry used to bean overhead, 
mobile feeding sprayer for the three-bin nursery 
below. It is now fixed in place and serves as a 
pulpit from which to sermonize when Drayk feels 
the need to mislead guests. 

17. Cathedral: A huge reactor-turned-temple, 
the massive chamber still reflects its origins as 
the massive electrical turbines remain aligned in 
pairs down the length of the room. The monks 
and nuns have set up pews from which to revel in 
the word of Drayk during faked ceremonies. 

18. Fusion generators (16): These rusted hulks 
arealluseless and remain from the original green- 
house experiment. They are not salvageable and 
lay about the factory in disarray. 


GoCorp JL7 Elixir Hoverscooter 
Craft: GoCorp JL7 Elixir Hoverscooter 
Type: Hoverscooter 
Scale: Character 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: Hoverscooter 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: None 
Cover: 1/4 
Cargo Capacity: 5 kilograms 
Altitude Range: Ground level-1 meter 
Cost: 2,000 credits 
Move: 10; 30 KPH 
Maneuverability: 3D 


Weapons: None 


Typical Monastery Nun 
Template Type: Dim-U Priestess 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 4D, dodge 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Bureaucracy 4D+1, language 3D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Astrogation 3D-1, starfighter piloting 4D, 
starship shields 2D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Con 5D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Computer programming/repair 5D+2, space 
transports repair 6D, starfighter repair 6D 
Force Sensitive?; No 
Force Points: 0 
Dark Side Points: 0 
Character Points: 1-5 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Comlink, hold-out blaster (dam- 
age: 3D+1, range: 3-4/8/12), Dim-U robes 

Quote: "The way of the Bantha is one of majes- 
tic beauty and calm peace. Oneness with the 
natural world. We strive to understand the power 
of the creature." 


Mos Eisley 


79 


John Paul Lona 


Company 


Notsub is easily the largest company on 
Tatooine and employs almost 1,000 beings and 
300 Droids. Located on the northern edge of the 
city, the company is far from the cramped down- 
town area, while being close enough to allow 
many employees to walk to work. 

Notsub's main industry is shipping, but the 
company also owns a stock brokerage, as well as 
a half-dozen other minor interests, and owns 
controlling stock in over 50 more companies. 
Notsub also owns Notsub Security, one of the 
largest private security firms in Mos Fisley. 

Notsub owns a cluster of several warehouses, 
some of which have roofside landing pads, dock- 
ing bays, as well as its corporate headquarters, 
which is a large, two-story affair. 

Diversification has been the thrust of Notsub 
forthe past ten seasons, thanks to CEO Armanda 
Durkin. As Notsub has spread its influence, its 


Armanda Durkin 
DEXTERITY 3D+1 


Blaster 4D+1, dodge 4D+2, melee com- 


bat 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 


АВ 
ARS 


EIN Notsub Shipping 


financial picture has improved as well. 


Armanda's Rise 


Notsub's upward-looking balance sheets 
weren't always so optimistic. When she first 
began at Notsub, Armanda Durkin was deter- 
mined to make a good showing and wanted to 
make some quick credits. She invested in some 
high-risk enterprises early in her tenure at Notsub, 
but things didn’t quite turn out the way she had 
hoped: a water-drilling investment came up dry; 
the owners of a telescope manufacturing com- 
pany couldn’t focus on their product; and a bro- 
kerage house went broke. 

Undaunted, Armanda decided to take matters 
into her own hands. She reviewed the shipment 
manifest for the next few months, and came up 
with three very interesting prospects from three 
different manufacturers. All were raw materials, 


and often done up in a complicated 
style. When disguised as the Duchess, 
she tucks her auburn hair under an 
aviator cap, and hides her svelte fig- 
ure in a flight jumpsuit. 


John Paul Lona 


Bureaucracy 4D, planetary systems 
3D+1, planetary systems: Tatooine 5D 
MECHANICAL 3D+1 

Astrogation 4D, repulsorlift operation 
3D+2, space transports 5D+1 
PERCEPTION 4D 

Command 6D, con 7D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Brawling 4D+2, stamina 6D+2 
TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D, se- 
curity 5D+2, space transports repair 
2D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 3 

Dark Side Points: 2 

Character Points: 21 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Comlink, high quality 
space suit, blaster pistol (4D damage, 
3-10/30/120) 


Description: Armanda has a penchant 
for brocade and silks, and only the 
finest of those. Her hair is luxurious 


Background: Armanda Durkin — 
wealthy power broker and shipping 
magnate. She is driven to succeed be- 
cause of tragedy. Her husband was in- 
jured and their business was destroyed 
inamysterious fire. The insurance com- 
pany, Maltsett, refused to pay, citing an 
obscure legal reference. Without the 
insurance payment they could not af- 
ford the treatments needed to save his 
life. Now she leads a double life, stealing 
her own shipping to make Maltsett pay 
for its crimes. 

Personality: Armanda, after so much 
tragedy, cares for nothing more than 
money or success, although her con- 
science has bothered her after several 
unnecessary deaths due to her piracy. 


Objectives: To keep Notsub’s coffers 
full, using the blood of the Maltsett 
insurance company. 


A Quote: “Please remain seated or we 
will be forced to knock you uncon- 
scious.” 


Mos Eisley 


ЎТА} LOCATIONS 
ZZ zZ EE 


"WA 


all were to be shipped on Notsub's Corvettes, 
and all were insured by Maltsett Insurance Com- 
pany. Since she had a personal grudge against 
Maltsett, Armanda set into motion a wild swindle. 

Getting financing to purchase an armed and 
armored freighter was performed with little ef- 
fort. Getting a transponder signal altered was no 
problem and picking up a signal jammer was 
easy, considering her wealth. And aligning her- 
self with the type of people willing to do the tasks 
she required was incredibly easy, considering 
the fact that she was in Mos Eisley. 

She and her group of toughs left that night on 
this new freighter, the Vengeful Sandstorm. A 
Corvette carrying plastisteel left a Notsub dock 
destined for an office building at the Imperial 
maintenance facilities on Myomar. Theship never 
made it out of the system. Armanda's freighter 
overtook the plodding Corvette, and 


undermanned and poorly armed, the Corvette's 
crew surrendered. Armanda's thugs lightened 
the Corvette's load and left for the far side of 
Tatooine's moon, where they waited for the rest 
of the night. Armanda was later able to sell the 
plastisteel at a tremendous profit, plus she was 
ableto claim insurance money for a stolen cargo. 


Thus began Armanda Durkin's double life as the 
pirate named Duchess. 

Armanda Durkin has continued her piracy and 
her actions helped to turn Notsub around. With 
fluid capital, she was able to diversify, pursue 
highly profitable, but legal cargos, and make alot 
of money. Her piracy continued (she began prey- 
ing on non-Notsub ships in other systems), and 
thanks to companies who wouldn't question the 
source of products, made a fortune. Notsub has 
also purchased smaller companies that use ma- 
terials directly, write off their raw materials pur- 
chases to bogus corporations, and manufacture 
high profit items. 

Of course, Armanda is getting worried. If she 
continues, her piracy is likely to be revealed. She 
feels it is time to get out of the business. She was 
also spooked by a recent incident, when some 
unfortunate cargo haulers thought a cargo of 
Droid parts was worth fighting over — twelve of 
them lost their lives. Armanda discovered that 
the Droid parts were actually smuggled medi- 
cines. Through various contacts she was able to 
deduce that they were most likely destined for 
the Rebellion. 


Thrung Alewune 


DEXTERITY 4D 

Blaster 4D+2, dodge 5D, melee combat 
5D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Streetwise 3D+1 

MECHANICAL 2D+2 

Repulsorlift operation 3D, starship 
gunnery 4D+1, starship shields 3D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 

Gambling3D+2, search 4D, sneak2D+1 
STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D+1, lifting 4D 
TECHNICAL 3D+1 

Computer programming/repair 4D+1, 
demolition 3D+2, space transports 
repair 4D+2 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 3 

Dark Side Points: 3 

Character Points: 10 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Comlink, high quality 
space suit, 2,500 credits, blaster car- 
bine (5D damage, 3-25/60/250) 


Description: Thrung is a Ho'Din who 
has bound his ample violet locks to 


his head and wears a cap. His height can 
be intimidating to those unfamiliar with 
his species' natural gentleness. 


Background: Thrung Alewune is a typi- 
cal pirate under Armanda's command. 
This Ho'Din has been around the galaxy 
afew times, so he has amply experience. 

Thrung is getting weary of Armanda's 
moral code against killing. The group has 
missed out on choice opportunities for 
increased wealth simply because 
Armanda will not allow her crew to strip 
the passengers of their personal valu- 
ables. He has suggested to Armanda that 
it is time for her to hang up her pirate 
career; Thrungis gaining converts among 
her crew. 


Personality: Thrung considérs it an as- 
setto exhibit none of his species' charac- 
teristic gentleness. He has renounced his s 


of nature and has turned all his energies toward in- 


creasing his understanding of technology. 
Objectives: To insure profitable runs. 


A Quote: “Look, I’m here just for the cargo. Don't try 
anything and we'll be out of here in no time." 


John Paul Lona 


pecies' love 


Mos Eisley 


81 


Allen Nunis 


Notsub Security is the largest private security 
firm in Mos Eisley, employing over 500 people full 
time, and providing security to numerous small 
businesses and corporations. Like most Mos 
Eisley company patrol craft, Notsub's ships are 
licensed only for atmospheric travel. 

The company is based in a two-story ware- 
house facility, only a few blocks from Notsub's 
corporate headquarters, containing no less than 
a dozen cloud cars, several unarmed land- 
speeders, and, of course, all supplies and equip- 
ment for its guards. Guards are typically given 
landspeeders for long-range patrols around large 
facilities, or conduct foot patrols for whatever 
smaller buildings are being patrolled. All Notsub 
contracted buildings have also been equipped 
with alarm systems, so that if they are tampered 
with, Notsub can send guards in response. 


Typical Notsub Security Personnel 
DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Blaster 4D, dodge 4D+2, melee combat 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Cultures 3D+1, languages 4D, streetwise 
5D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding 2D+1, repulsorlift operation 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 


АН... 
ARS 


EZHNotsub Security 


Search 4D, sneak 2D+2 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D+2 

Security 3D+1 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 0-3 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Protective desert clothing, 
comlink, filtermask, Sharpshooter V blaster (4D+1 
damage, 3-30/80/350) 

A Quote: “Trespassing is against the law. Leave 
now or we will take you into custody by whatever 
means necessary.” 


Bespin Motors Hurricane 506 
Cloud Car 
Craft: Bespin Motors Hurricane 506 
Cloud Car 
Type: Twin-Pod Cloud Car 
Scale: Speeder 
Skill: Repulsorlift operation: cloud car 
Crew: 1 
Passengers: 1 
Cover: Full 
Cargo Capacity: 15 kilograms 
Altitude Range: 50-100 kilometers 


Mos Eisley 


—ST A R LOCATIONS 
ARS naa 


Cost: 60,000 credits Fire Control: 1D 
Move: 520;1500 KPH Range: 50-400/900/3km 
Maneuverability: 2D+2 Damage: 3D 
Body Strength: 2D+2 The twin-engine Hurricane Cloud Caris a single- 
Weapons: cockpit vehicle, with a cramped toboggan-like 
Double Blaster Cannon space for the pilot and co-pilot. One ofthe variant 
(fire linked) predecessors of the highly popular Storm IV, the 
Fire Arc: Front Hurricane has a tendency to roll to the left when 
Crew: 1 accelerating. Other than that, however, it is a 
Skill: Vehicle blasters durable machine with an excellent repair record. 


ee tt SSS en 


Mos Eisley 83 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas =m A Rosen 
л ккк M WARS 


84 Mos Eisley 


Ell Chapter Three 
Adventure Ideas 


Mos Eisley is a rich and varied adventure 
locale, providing countless conflicts and person- 
alities to interact with. Because of Mos Eisley's 
nature as a lawless, smuggling center, characters 
can be drawn here for any number of reasons. 
Smugglers and cargo handlers can be called here 
оп а simple cargo run. Rebel Alliance operatives 
may have to come here in order to get informa- 
tion, weapons or contraband supplies (such as 
military-issue blast vests or heavy duty power 
generators). Characters may come hereonatour 
of the Kuari Princess, intent on a Krayt Dragon 
hunt. In the end, if characters are landing on 
Tatooine, they will pass through Mos Fisley. 


Spice Runner's Gamble 


Anew spice merchant has come to Mos Eisley 
in an attempt to win Jabba's trade. The charac- 
ters aretargeted as one group who can help start 
this new smuggling ring. 

This adventure allows characters to immedi- 
ately get a feel for the nature of Mos Eisley and the 
people who live there; gullible characters are in 
for an interesting time. This adventure hook 
works best if the characters are destitute and 
willing to do almost anything to earn a few hard 
credits. But, then again, when aren t characters 
in this situation? 

There are two ways to get into this plot. The 
first is if the characters find out about the smug- 
gling ring and then volunteer for work. The sec- 
ond is to have the characters stumble upon the 
whole situation and get forced into participating, 
working as pawns for Jabba the Hutt. 

Episode One: When the characters arrive at 
Mos Eisley, they will hear word about town that 
anew spice dealer has entered the crime scene in 
Mos Eisley. Most who talk about the situation are 
talking about how dangerous it is to intrude upon 
the Hutt’s trade, and once Jabba finds out who is 
behind this they are dead. Nonetheless, the spice 
dealer is offering excellent prices — if someone 
can get a load or two before the Hutt cracks 
down, they stand to make a fortune. 


Mos Eisley 


The group spends some time tracking down 
rumors, going from bar to bar. It seems that no 
one wants to talk to them — and if they are too 
obvious, they will attract the attention of some of 
Jabba's goons (see their stats in location 13, 
“Jabba’s Townhouse”), who will clumsily follow 
the characters around town. The characters 
should be able to figure out that they are being 
followed and be given ample time to lose them or 
set an ambush. 

Eventually, they are told that a group of the 
new spice smugglers are meeting that evening in 
Docking Bay 56, a decrepit and abandoned dock- 
ing bay on the northern edge of the city. If they 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


STA р 
WA 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


want a contract, they are to be there. 


Episode Two: Arrivingat Docking Bay 56, things 
appear suspicious. The characters will be totally 
justified in thinking that they are walking into a 
trap, although the information they received is 
legitimate. Characters making Difficult search or 
Perception totals will notice several disguised 
thugs near Docking Bay 56, and as the characters 
pass, the thugs call to someone on their comlinks. 

As they approach the entrance of the docking 
bay, they are confronted by a tough-looking thug 
who approaches them from a darkened alley 
across the street. He questions them about their 
intentions, who told them to come here and so 
forth. If they answer truthfully, they are allowed 
to enter. 

Entering the docking bay, they see a place that 
has obviously been abandoned for decades. All 
of the machinery is falling apart, the cargo ramp 
creaks when people walk on it, and only two or 
three of the dim landing lights work (there are no 
other lights in the bay). Soon, three or four other 
groups of individuals come out of the darkness, 
and introduce themselves as other smugglers. 

A weaselly Rodian walks forward, introducing 
himself as Dwess, an employee of the new smug- 
gling lord. He repeats everything the characters 
have heard before — his boss is looking for new 
spice smugglers — and tells them point blank 


АВ 
ARS 


that this operation will be run differently than 
other smuggling operations. He is selling spice at 
the rate of 45,000 credits a “smuggle” load (half a 
ton) — less than a third of what a crimelord 
normally has to pay for one. The smugglers who 
buy the cargos are free to resell the goods to 
whoever they want to at whatever price they 
want. If they want in, they have to come up with 
a5,000 credit deposit for the next meeting in two 
days. 

Characters figure that if the deal is legitimate, 
they could earna huge profit by selling directly to 
a spice dealer. Now, if only the characters could 
figure out a way to raise some credits to buy that 
initial shipment. 


Episode Three: The characters have to spend 
their time trying to borrow money from less than 
legitimate sources (a bank isn’t likely to loan 
money for this type of operation). This means 
that they may have to approach Jabba, coming 
up with acover story about “ship modifications,” 
or approach the gangster Valarian, or even try to 
approach one of their past customers. If the 
characters are having trouble, have them meet 
an eccentric, rich codger who is looking for ad- 
venture and excitement and whois willing to loan 
them the money in exchange for a cut of the 
profits. 

Note: If the characters are to “stumble” into 


Mos Eisley 


—S T A R Cha per Three: Adventure Ideas 
RS M ——————o 


WA 


this plot, they will simply hear about the meeting 
after it occurred. Unfortunately, some of Jabba's 
goons will think that they were at the meeting 
and willthreaten them ifthey don't help them get 
Dwess by going to the next meeting. 

Once they have secured the money, cut to the 
meeting. Dwess is present along with several new 
thugs, and a six-person airspeeder. He explains 
that the ships will be loaded in the sand flats to 
the south of town, where their business will be 
less conspicuous. He gives each ofthe smugglers 
a datamap (on datapad disc) in exchange for a 
deposit of 5,000 credits, telling them to meet him 
there in five hours. After getting their money, 
Dwess and his thugs take off into the night, 
explaining that they have to prepare their car- 
gos. He gives each of the characters a small bag 
of spice as well, worth about 1,000 credits, as a 
show of good will and to prove the quality of the 
product. 

If any characters appear unhappy with this 
idea, he will simply tell them to leave, and then 
send a group of his enforcers after them. If a 
firefight breaks out in the abandoned landing 
bay, Jabba's goons will charge into the fray as 
well, making for a complex situation for the char- 
acters: there is vast potential for confusion, as 
Dwess and his goons will try to escape with 
whatever money they can; Jabba's goons are 
trying to get Dwess, but also want to take out the 
smugglers; and, the various smuggler parties are 
trying to get out with their lives. 


Episode Four: The final meeting spot, late at 
night in the sand flats outside of Mos Fisley. 
Whatever smugglers paid their money will be at 
thesite, but not Dwess. However, there are some 
people who wantto meet them — first, Tatooine's 
militia shows up, ready to arrest everyone carry- 
ing spice (that's why Dwess gave them the bags). 
Second, Jabba's goons arrivein force equaltothe 
militia, ready to eliminate all of the smugglers 
who were willing to sell out to another spice 
merchant. 

Surprisingly, the militia commanding officer 
decides to leave after confiscating the bags of 
Spice and whatever credits the smugglers have 
with them. Jabba's goons will hold the smugglers 
prisoner for several hours, until just before dawn, 
when a small sail barge approaches. On it is 
Jabba himself, who is curious as to why the 
operation is taking so long. Then he laughs, ridi- 
culingthe smugglers — they have fallen for a con. 
Dwess had no other spice, and has simply taken 
their money. He releases the smugglers, encour- 
aging them to hunt down Dwess and get their 
revenge, for he has made a fool of them all. If the 
characters ask around town, especially in the 
Mos Eisley Cantina, they will learn that a Rodian 
con man with a battered freighter lifted off a few 


Mos Eisley 


hours ago, destination unknown. 


A Rebel Agent 


The characters are investigated by Lieutenant 
Harburik, under suspicion of being Rebel Alli- 
ance agents. They must find some way to prove 
that they are innocent of the charges. 


Episode One: The characters encounter one 
of their acquaintances in Mos Eisley, who warns 
them that something is up with the local Prefect, 
andit seems to involve them. He advises them to 
keep their heads low, and to try to find out what 
is going on; he says that they aren't advised to 
leavesincethemilitiaand eventhestormtroopers 
based on the planet are probably trailing them. 

He suggests that they go to the Mos Eisley 
Cantina and try to meet Beeyon Nace, a regular 
there who works for the government and seems 
easily bought for information. 


Episode Two: Venturing to the cantina, they 
have a variety of “typical” street encounters, 
such as a firefight breaking out between rival 
thugs, a Jawa who tries to sell them an obviously 
malfunctioning Droid, and a thief who tries to 


steal some credits while they are distracted by a 
street performer. 

Once they get to the cantina, they can meet 
Nace easily, and he seems interested in talking to 
them as long as they are supplying drinks. They 
can quietly pump Nace for information: inter- 
spersed with ramblings he will let slip that the 
Prefect thinks that Voren Na'al, a researcher for 
the Rebel Alliance, is back on the planet. He 
thinks there's a reward worth several thousand 
credits on his head. The Prefect believes that one 
of the characters is Na'al, and Nace obliviously 
describes Na'al's companions, giving a complete 
description of all of the other characters. He says 
that the Prefect is trying to decode a datatape 
that Na'alleft behind on a previous trip — at this 
pointthereis no hard evidence against the people 
the Prefect is seeking, but he figures he should 
capture and interrogate them now, hoping that 
they'll confess and he won't have to have the 
tapes decoded. The tapes are currently at the 
Regional Government Offices (location 11). 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas a— o ——''P———M— A a 


ARS 


Nace will ask the characters for a ride off this 
miserable dust-ball, showing enthusiasm for be- 
ing taken to almost any other world. The episode 
concludes when the Tatooine militia wanders 
into the Cantina and saunters over to the bar. The 
bartender shrugs, but a short alien with long, 
pointed ears points directly toward the charac- 
ters. It's time for a fast exit ... 


Episode Three: The characters should have 
concluded that they will have to break into or go 
to the Regional Government Offices. If they go 
during the day, there are three lazy clerks who 
pay the characters по attention unless they try to 
go into Prefect Talmont’s office. They will try to 
stop them, but have no weapons and no alarms to 
sound, so the characters will certainly be able to 
force their way in. 

If the characters try to sneak in under cover of 
night, no one works there. The door has an alarm 
and requires an Easy security total to open (fail- 
ing the roll triggers the alarm). The can also pry 


To: Prefect Talmont 

From: Lieutenant Harburik 

Subject: Apprehending and detaining sus- 
pect subversive #354 

Sir, the investigation continues. The subject 
and his friends will no doubt be apprehended 
shortly. 

The other disk contains the captured en- 
coded datadisk which we believe to be from the 
subject. Translation efforts on our part have so 
far proven fruitless, although once we crack the 
code, no doubt we will have the evidence to 
convict him. 


To: Lieutenant Harburik 

From: Police Officer Dokus 

Subject: Apprehending and detaining sus- 
pected subversive #354 

Pursuant to your orders, the apartment was 
searched. Apparently the subject knew he was 
targeted for interrogation, because there was 
evidence of a hasty departure. The apartment 
itself revealed no clues as to his current where- 
abouts, although our informants place him as 
an active member of the Rebel Alliance. 


The landlady has been thoroughly questioned. | 


She has no information regarding the target's 
mission or destination. 


All may not be lost, however. One of my 
officers located a datapad on which several files 
had been erased. We managed to extract most 
of the files using standard recovery protocols. 
However, the contents of the files were coded; 
we are currently attempting to unravel the 
codes. l'm certain that these files contain the 
evidence we require. | have enclosed copies of 
the files for your perusal. 

Imperial Intelligence knows something of the 
author of these files, Voren Na'al. According to 
their records, Na'al served for several years as 
a reporter for the Galactic News Service. He is 
now assistant to the Rebellion’s Master Histo- 
rian, Arhul Hextrophon. Na'al has been report- 
ing on the traitors intimately involved in the 
Incident at Yavin. 


To: Police Officer Dokus 

From: Lieutenant Harburik 

Subject: Apprehending and detaining sus- 
pected subversive #354 

Officer, this datatape may be of some use to 
us. Our encryptors are currently trying to 
determine the underlying codes to extract the 
sensitive information we require. 

Good work! 


Mos Eisley 


STAR —— —À———Ó—— 


"WA 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


To: Lieutenant Harburik 
From: Prefect Talmont 


Subject: Search for suspect subversive #354 
Harburik, this tape is garbage. The traitor 
obviously left behind this tape in a foolish 


attempt to mislead the Empire. Your investiga- 
tors clumsily blamed several innocent persons. 


Consider yourself fortunate that you are 
serving under the command of such an astute 
bureaucrat as myself; one who is not quite as 
gullible as you. 

Destroy all copies of this nonsense, or | will 
make sure that this information is placed in 
your permanent record. It would be a shame to 


| want them disciplined. 


open the windows with a Very Easy Dexterity 
total; there are no alarms on them. 

Whenthey break into Prefect Talmont's office, 
they will easily find a pair of datadisks, both 
labeled *V. Na'al Investigation," on his desk. 

The first disk contains the memos regarding 
the Voren Na'al incident (see page 88). 

The characters should try to alter the informa- 
tion—it's suggested that they choosesomething 
humorous, suchasa recipe database. At the very 
least, it must be something so simple that it 
proves that the characters aren't Rebel sympa- 
thizers. Altering the information reguires a Mod- 
erate computer programming/repair total, al- 
though the characters will have to keep low when 
militia patrols stop by to check on the building. 
The scene in which they are altering the informa- 
tion should be tense and dramatic, but not too 
dangerous. 


Episode Four: The characters find out from 
Beeyon Nace or other contacts on the street that 
Prefect Talmont has realized that this was a 
colossal case of mistaken identity and they are 
no longer wanted for questioning. 

They also learn from Nace or some other 
person involved with the government that what 
really happened is that the information was fi- 
nally decoded and turned out to be whatever the 
characters inserted. Additionally, their contact 
got a copy of the memo Prefect Talmont sent to 
Harburik (see above). 


Scavengers' Race 

The characters learn that a modified Corellian 
Corvette crash landed in the desert during a 
brutal sandstorm. Notsub Shipping is offering a 
finders’ fee of 5,000 credits to the first individuals 
who find it — Notsub can only track it down toa 
2,000 square kilometer area, and sensor scans 
aren’t able to pick out the ship. The characters 
will be racing several other groups and possibly 


Mos Eisley 


see you stuck on this planet forever. 


Jawa sandcrawlers for the find. 


Episode One: The characters hear of the ship 
either through contacts they have with Notsub, 
or from some guards who are off-duty discussing 
the matter. They learn that the Corvette crashed 
far out in the desert and that Notsub is quietly 
sub-contracting groups to find the vessel. Notsub 
wants to keep the incident from becoming public 
knowledge for fear that other companies will try 
to claim it. Notsub will hire the characters, pay- 
ing a 500 credit search fee, which is theirs to 
keep, and they will give another 4,500 if they find 
the ship. 

The characters have one night to equip them- 
selves with any gear they think they might need. 
Notsub will be loading them and three other 
search groups aboard a search vessel in the 
morning. If the characters decide to go out on the 
town, encourage them to have a run-in with 
another group of revelers — the group turns out 
to be a rival group of explorers. 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


Episode Two: The characters meet at the 
designated landing bay at Notsub headguarters. 
All of the characters’ gear is stowed aboard a 
Corvette, along with that ofthree other groups of 
rough mercenaries who are also looking for the 
ship. Each group is given a pair of airspeeders for 
the survey, in addition to survival gear. 

The trip to the search site is a great opportu- 
nity to introduce the other search parties. At 
least one group should be antagonistic and clearly 
willing to be underhanded to get the prize money, 
and the Notsub guards refuse to stop the conflict 
—they don’t care who or how the ship is found as 
long as it is found. 

Once they land and make camp, the search can 
begin in earnest. However, Tatooine is a big desert. 
During the day, the characters can have a run-in 
with a Krayt dragon, or Tusken Raiders or any 
number of other natural hazards — a sudden 


AR... 
ARS 


sandstorm could certainly liven things up. Addi- 
tionally, feel free to introduce new predators to 
Tatooine — perhaps a Sarlacc type of monster, a 
sand-snake or other creature could prove exciting! 

Eventually, just before a chilling and deadly 
cold night begins, the characters find the ship. 
However, they have to return to camp that night. 
Meanwhile, the rival group has figured out what 
the characters have done. The characters may 
chooseto watch their rivals, or decideto salvage 
at night — no matter what, though, they will get 
no help from their employers unless someone 
seems ready to damage the ship. 


Episode Three: The gamemaster will find the 
maps ofthe Corellian Corvette on pages 64 and 65 
of The Rebel Alliance Sourcebook helpful in run- 
ning this scene. The Notsub security guards in- 
form the characters that their goalis the forward 
hold on deck four of the ship, and they must 
retrieve the gear. The ship's third and fourth 
decks are buried in the sand, so the characters 
will have to cut through the hull on the second 
deck and then make their way down. The guards 
callforassistance, and explainthat cargo haulers 
will arrive in a few hours — until then, the char- 
acters must help retrieve the cargo to get their 
money. 

All of the turbolifts are inactive; they'll often 

have to use access shafts to get between decks. 
Allofthecrewmen were killed in the crash and all 
on-board Droids have either been damaged be- 
yond repair or ran out of power. When the char- 
acters investigate the ship, they face the follow- 
ing obstacles: 
* Live cables prove an obstruction. The charac- 
ters must make Moderate Dexterity totals not to 
touch them or find some way to remove or de- 
electrify them. 


* Clumps of mynocks have attached themselves 
totheship, entering through various holes. They 
need to be flushed out to get to the door on the 
other end of the hallway (see the Star Wars 
SourcebooR for mynock statistics). 


* The way is blocked. They must turn back and 
find another route. 


* A pack of womp rats have formed a den just 
outsidethe computer core, and haveno desireto 
leave. 


Womp Rat 

DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 1D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
Move: 5 
Size: 2.1 meters long 
Attacks: 

Claws: 2D«2 damage 

Teeth: 3D+1 damage 


90 


Mos Eisley 


—S T A — ț Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 
WA 


Ponda Baba 


Height: 1.85 meters 

Species: Aqualish 

Sex: Male 

Homeworld: Ando 

Age: 29 

DEXTERITY 3D+1 

Brawling parry 4D+1, melee combat 4D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Alien species 3D+2, intimidation 5D 
MECHANICAL 3D+2 

Astrogation 4D+1, space transports 4D+2, 
starship gunnery 4D«2 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 5D, stamina 5D 

TECHNICAL 2D+2 

Space transports repair 3D«2 

Story Factors: 

Obsessed: Ponda Baba is determined to get 
revenge against Dr. Evazan for his failed cyber- 
netic experiments on Baba's arm. 

Force Sensitive?: No 

Force Points: 0 

Dark Side Points: 0 

Character Points: 12 

Move: 10 


Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D damage), gre- 
nades (5D damage), club (STR+1D damage) 


Description: Imposing and intimidating, Ponda 
Baba dresses in common spacers' garb. Ponda 
Baba lost his right hand in a battle with Obi-Wan 
Kenobi; he hasn't yet received a prosthetic re- 
placement, so his arm is a hideous sight. He 
attempts to conceal his weapons beneath his 
jacket, hoping to goad others into fights. 


Background: Ponda Baba was a long-time com- 
panion to the infamous Dr. Evazan. The two had 
developed quite a reputation as smugglers, and 
were famous for starting fights with many de- 
fenseless foes in cantinas around the galaxy. 
Evazan's horrible mutilations of his “patients” 
were famous enough to earn him a death sen- 


Combat: These vicious Tatooine natives at- 
tack in packs of up to five. The hairy carnivores 
usually circle once, then lunge. They scatter 
when a total of three wounds has been inflicted 
upon the pack as a whole or an incapacitated 
result has been inflicted on any single individual. 


* When passing through a large area, noxious gas 
fills it (attacks with 4D versus Strength — on a 
wounded or better result, character is overcome 


tence in over a dozen systems, 
and Evazan's victims are offer- 
ing a million credit bounty on 
the doctor's head. Ponda grew 
to enjoy the notoriety and atten- 
tiontheDoctor's companionship 
earned — he learned that most 
people were scared of the doc- 
tor due to his reputation and 
would doanythingto getthe pair 
out of their company. Ponda 
found that he could get what he 
wanted with little hassle with 
Evazan at his side. 

After Ponda lost his arm, Dr. 
Evazan attempted to attach a 
cybernetic replacement, but the 
operation was a miserable fail- 
ure. While Dr. Evazan fled the 
world, Baba spent several 
weeks recovering from the 
trauma of the operation. Baba 
dedicated himself to hunting 
down and killing Evazan. After 
several months of unsuccess- 
fully tracking leads, he has fi- 
nally trailed his former com- 
panion backto Tatooine, where 
he is operating under the false name of Dr. 
Cornelius. 


Mike Manley 


Personality: Gruff and intimidating. Ponda 
Baba is always itching for a fight, normally 
with those who appear smaller and weaker 
than he. He is greedy, cruel and altogether 
despicable. Since Ponda cannot speak Basic, 
he often starts a fight regardless of what re- 
sponse he receives. After his incident with 
Kenobi, he is now very leery of lightsabers. 


Objectives: To hunt down Dr. Evazan and kill 
him. Nothing else matters at this point. Of 
course, the million credit bounty on Dr. 
Evazan's head will be nice too. 


A Quote: "Neggrh ghogola woldewa!” <<I don’t 
like your face. Want to fight?>> 


with nausea for five minutes; tryingto do anything 
other than crawl suffers a penalty of -3D). If any of 
thecharacters are overcome with nausea, they are 
attacked by another pack of womp rats. They can 
attempt to wait until the fumes disperse, or they 
can actively try to pump it out. Perhaps they can 
reach the environmental controls to see if one or 
two blowers are functional. 

When the characters finally arrive at the for- 


— TTTT—€€ TH — hmmm, 


Mos Eisley 


91 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas memme [JA Pa 
ARST 


The Doctor will mention to the Jawa that the 
“messenger” he sent by yesterday was “delight- 
ful.” If the characters ask, the Jawa will seem 
evasive about the situation — ultimately, by 
asking around the city, perhaps street people, 
shop owners and so forth, they will learn that 
Kieth was the messenger (he agreed to drop off 
some parts in order to save a few credits on the 
deal — it was the Squib’s idea). What neither 
Kieth nor the Squib knew was that Dr. Cornelius 
would somehow subdue him and perform experi- 
ments on him, burying the body in the caves 
below Mos Eisley. 


Episode Two: Eventually the characters learn 
Dr. Cornelius’ street address, and will presum- 
ably decide to investigate (the city police have 
no interest in the case since Kieth wasn’t a 
Tatooine resident). 

If the characters come during normal office 
hours, the receptionist is able to figure out what 
they were up to, and will only allow them to make 
an appointment for the next day. If they leave an 
address, the place they are staying at will be 
ransacked at some point in the adventure. It is 
suggested that the group return after hours to 
investigate. The office shows signs of recent 
activities: there are stains on smocks and the 
tools have not been cleaned. 

The medical files on the computer relate sto- 


Шш Coral Ohah of Sleeft Docking Bay Maintenance 


ward hold, they learn that the cargo was a ship- 
ment of power fusion crystal chips, used to regu- 
late fusion generators. Removing the chips will 
be quick and safe, and perhaps there is even a 
chance for the characters to make amends with 
their rivals. In addition, Notsub will give a 500 
credit bonus to each group which helped unload 
the chips. 


The Edge of Fashion 


A friend of the characters, Kieth Cairn, has 
disappeared after a medical visit to the Cutting 
Edge clinic. It seems that Doctor Cornelius has 
slipped up once too often. 


Episode One: A friend ofthe characters named 
Kieth Cairn calls on them while he is in port. He 
wants to meet them to discuss a new contract, 
family business or some other plausible explana- 
tion. He explains that he has some things to do 
before the meeting, including a stop at the Jawa 
Traders Droid shop, but after that he will meet 
them. However, he doesn't appear. 

The characters will probably turn suspicious 
and investigate Jawa Traders. There, they will 
encounter the Squib and Jawa owners of the 
shop. Whilethe characters are there, Dr. Cornelius 
will stop by to pickup a few “Droid” parts that will 
be used for his evil cyborging experiments. 


> 
E 
t 
5 
= 
Н 
> 


шш The infamous Dr. Evazan/Cornelius 


92 Mos Eisley 


—DARI—————— Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas 


"WA 


ries of horror. Files have many personal notes 
scattered throughout, telling how Cornelius dis- 
posed of bodies andother gruesome details. The 
characters can easily find the file dealing with the 
death of Kieth. 

A medical Droid is sitting in a corner, 
seemingly deactivated. But it suddenly 
comes to life and begins prepping 
for an operation. Taking a 
closerlook, itis obviousthat 
the Droid's olfactory and / 
visual electronics have А 
been ripped out of its , 
head, but it is ready / 
to go after the char- / oy 
acters. | 


Episode Three:| 
The characters| 
have discovered \\s - 
the gruesome truth ` 
— what they want to ^ 
do about the goings- 
on is their business. The 
police, upon hearing proof, will 
opt to investigate. Meanwhile, Dr. Cornelius will 
attempt to hunt them down — a night-time fight 
in the alleys of Mos Eisley would make a suitable 
dramatic conclusion. For added suspense, Ponda 
Baba, Dr. Cornelius’ former Aqualish compan- 
ion, confronts the doctor in the interest of re- 
venge. 


A Bith Saved Is A Bith Learned 


A Sleeft Docking Bay Maintenance freighter 
was checked out by a Bith named Angor Farn. He 
accidentally got the wrong ship: the cargo is a 
load of high-quality Droid parts, stolen from one 
of Armanda Durkin's warehouses by Sleeft. While 
Sleeft hired Angor to take a cargo of power con- 
vertorstotheCorellian system, he hit the jackpot 
with this load of Droid parts. Angor Farn has not 
only found the parts, but has decided to skip 
town with them. 

To do that, he needs to change the transpon- 
der signal. Thus, he is visiting the Dim-U monas- 
tery. The Sleeft company knows where he went, 
but not why (they are unaware of the monastery’s 
true nature). Angor has contacted Armanda with 
an offer to sell the Droid parts in order to get 
some liquid credits. Armanda suspects that Angor 
is trying to sell back her own cargo. Angor's ship 
is stationed at Docking Bay 31 while he waits for 
the new transponder code or the money from 
Armanda. Armanda is playing the scene cau- 
tiously because she knows that she can't openly 
buy the parts from Angor without alerting Sleeft 
that she is involved in piracy and purchasing 
black market parts. Armanda also wants to find 
proof that Sleeft is responsible for these actions 


against her. 


Episode One: Coral Ohah, one of the directors 
of Sleeft Docking Bay Maintenance, contacts the 
characters. Coral tells them a high-level corpo- 

rate partner of Sleeft has been kidnapped, a 
Bith named Angor Farn. Because of 

the nonviolent, pacifistic na- 
' tureofBiths, he clearly will 
notattempttoescape 
— and might actu- 
allyimpedehis own 
.rescue in the 
hopes of work- 
» ing out an eg- 
uitable and 
peaceful ar- 
rangement. Nev- 
ertheless, he is in pos- 
/ session of information which 
must not fall into the hands of 
competitors. Coral hints that the com- 
petition is notorious for their brainwash- 
ing and interrogation techniques. 

He is being held at the Dim-U Monastery, pos- 
sibly without the monastery's knowledge. So 
Coral wants to hire the characters to infiltrate 
and comb the place for Angor. Coral will go in 
with them. 


Episode Two: The characters can pose as 
Bantha purchasers, new converts or perhaps 
fellow ecology buffs devoted to saving the natu- 
ral habitat of the Bantha — whatever gets them 
access to the monastery. Once inside, the char- 
acters can split up and wander around, while 
Coral approaches the abbot. The characters soon 
discover that there is more to the Dim-U than 
meets the eye, but soon Coral reappears and 
herds everyone out. Clearly an assault is war- 
ranted: Angor is inside, but will soon be moving. 
Time is of the essence. 


Episode Three: Coral wants to attack an hour 
later. Depending upon the characters' tactics, 
the monks and nuns may defend, or simply flee. 
Drayk destroys the database if it appears to be in 
jeopardy and takes off. Coral finds Angor, and the 
characters carry him out. Coral privately de- 
briefs Angor. He learns of the Bith's attempted 
betrayal, and finds out where the freighter is 
docked. He also learns that Armanda's security 
guards are preparingto confiscate the ship since 
Drayk has probably informed Notsub what Coral 
has done. 

Coral returns to the characters, pays them, 
and offers another story and another job pro- 
posal: the ship is being guarded by the “riff-raff” 
who originally kidnapped the Bith, and the ship 
must be retrieved before the valuable cargo can 
be sold. Of course, the ship is actually being 


ا ج س «oss —À—‏ کے 
Mos Eisley 93‏ 


Chapter Three: Adventure Ideas m Ý JA Rosen 
: — WAR 


guarded by undercover Notsub guards (Armanda 
reguires undercover guards so she can hide her 
involvement in this caper). The freighter is about 
to leave, so the characters must blast into the 
bay and take off, landing at specific coordinates 
far to the south of Mos Eisley. They will be met by 
a squad of Sleeft security, who will pay them and 
take the ship; they will be given a private trans- 
port so they can sneak back into Mos Fisley 
unnoticed. 


Episode Four: Unaccompanied by Coral, but 
with Angor, the characters break into the bay, 


but have to fight through the small guard comple- 
ment and take off without clearance. 

Once the craft is airborne, they are attacked 
by a pair of Mos Eisley’s cloud cars, and then 
after they are fended off, a pair of Notsub Z-95 
Headhunters take to the air after them. The char- 
acters are likely outgunned and outclassed. Once 
they are forced down, Angor explains to the 
characters and Armanda what really happened. 
Armanda declares that she will take the Droid 
parts, and the ship as payment. But she offers the 
characters a cargo run or some other job as away 
to repay the deceptions of Coral. 


—————————————— 


94 


Mos Eisley 


The Saga Continuesl 


DARK FORCE RISING 
SOURCEBOOK 


GAMES, 
RR 3 Box 2345 = Honesdale, PA 18431 


® © 1993 Lucasfilm, Ltd. {LFL}. All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


SPACE IS BIG. LIFE IS HARD. 


On the Frontier. Beyond the Core. 


There is Jonn Stryker, 
a leader of men, a mercenary without peer, 
who fought for power, glory and money. 


Until he became the 


(laka 
VIVI VO 


Vetus 


& 
R, TM & € 1993 West End Games. All Rights Reserved 


STAR WARS 


GALAXY GUIDE 7 


MOS EISLEY 


by Martin Wixted 


Come explore the infamous pirate spaceport city of 
Mos Eisley. Pounded by the relentless twin suns of 
Tatooine, Mos Eisley is host to some of the most 
famous (or infamous) smugglers and criminals in the 
galaxy! 

Made famous by the exploits of Han Solo and the 
treachery of Jabba the Hutt, Mos Eisley is the ultimate 
adventuring locale for fans of the Star Wars movies. 

This book provides a complete overview of this out- 
law city. It contains detailed location descriptions, 
with maps, gamemaster character descriptions and 
illustrations. Includes introductory chapters describ- 
ing the history of Tatooine and Mos Eisley! 


For gamemaster and one or more players. 
For ages 12 and up. 
®, ™ & © 1993 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. 
Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


WEST 
Vs. e. 
us KRII 


40069 


Lobby 


А > 


20.0, 5 f А > , 

e Р [I . * Ж, ® u " E 
2 p, * à ЭТ, Үз [DE eter ا‎ 
- Ф PU UE eis Jr NIS e 4: 


Ж ETE зш тён EV! 
a зш | ERE 


3 i OF 
== See |, (PE zu i иш 


Powen ROOM 


Down to Storage BaseMeNt 


Mes Este Cantina 


Note: Dotted lines represent arched openings. 


Об 


Storage Access Hatch 


" з 
1 
' 
П 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
, 
' 


АП Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games, Inc., under 


TM & O 1997 Luca n Ltd. (LFL). 


®, ТМ & © 1997 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). АП Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games, Inc., under authorization 


s 
3overnment Offices 


STAR. WARS 
IMUU LIULLU 


HUVUHLUTU VUL 


“Mos Eisley Spaceport. You'll never find a 
more wretched hive of scum and villainy.” 


It’s a city teeming with danger, filled with shadowy characters 
who have their own hidden agendas. Smugglers and gangsters 
wander the streets, while illicit cargoes trade hands in the back 
corners of docking bays and cantinas. 

This desert spaceport city is the ultimate adventuring locale 
for fans of the Star Wars movies. This boxed set is a guide to the 
hazards and opportunities to be found in Mos Eisley, with nu- 
merous adventures, characters and locations for players to ex- 
plore. 


“Only watch your step. This place can be a 
little rough.” 


ADVENTURE SUPPLEMENT 


For use with the Star Wars roleplaying game 
and Star Wars Miniatures Battles. 


sue 


THIS BOXED SET CONTAINS: 
* 12 metal miniatures suitable for painting and 
gaming. 


A 32-page adventure book feature roleplaying 
adventures. 


Galaxy Guide 7: Mos Eisley. 


A full-color map. One side depicts the infamous 
Mos Eisley Cantina, while the other side features 
downtown Mos Eisley, including the Cantina, 
Docking Bay 94 and Jabba the Hutt’s Townhouse 


Six-sided dice. 


®, TM & © 1997 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


