== ш- 


Otherspace 


by Bill Slavicsek 


Development & Editing: Greg Gorden * Development Assistance: C. J. Tramontana 
Art Direction: Stephen Crane * Graphics: Bernadette Cahill, Rich Hawran, Sharon Wyckoff 
Cover and Interior Art: Jeff Dee ® Map Art: Stephen Crane * Production: Steve Porpora 
Rules Upgrade: Greg Gorden, Bill Slavicsek 


WYWW WEST 
3 {END 
GAMES 
RD 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale, PA 18431 


40018 


®, ™ & © 1989 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


ntroduction 


The theater darkens. Anticipation builds 
as the curtain slowly rises. Light splashes 
onto the silver screen, projecting images and 
shadows that will captivate the audience for 
the duration of the show. The music 
intensifies, the credits roll by, and another 
action-packed episode of Star Wars: The 
Roleplaying Game begins ... 

Otherspace is a Star Wars adventure for 
two to six players and a gamemaster. 
Gamemasters should read the entire 
adventure before play begins so that the 
action and storyline can progress naturally, 
without a lot of page flipping and 
undramatic pauses. 

Players, however, should stop reading this 
booklet now. The information contained 
herein is for gamemasters (GMs) only. 


In This Adventure ... 

... a group of Rebel heroes fight in a place 
far removed from the galaxy they are 
struggling to liberate. А problem with their 
ship's hyperdrive engine deposits the Rebels 
in a galaxy beyond realspace, in a dimension 
past the shifting colors of hyperspace. They 
find themselves in — otherspace. 

In this strange, unexplored dimension 
between the hyperlanes and realspace, the 
Rebels discover a harbor of lost ships — of 
both known and unknown origin. The 
abandoned, deserted vessels orbit a giant 
craft that resembles a decaying asteroid 
floating upon the ebony sea of space. 

Something awaits the Rebels within the 
dark interior of the desolate vessel, 
something terrible. It has waited untold ages 
for their arrival, planning for its eventual 
escape from this in-between place. And 
when it reaches realspace, then the galaxy 
will die! 


Adventure Materials 

In addition to the adventure booklet, 
Otherspace includes: 
e Star Wars Rules Upgrade. This four-page 
folder contains important additions and 


clarifications for Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game. Be sure to incorporate the new rules 
into your gaming sessions. 

e The Pullout Section. This eight-page 
pullout section includes the adventure 
script, maps of the Alliance transport 
Celestial, the gamemaster's key to the full- 
color map, non-player character templates, 
the "red mist cards" that simulate the effects 
of the alien nightmare gas, and the battle 
map that is suitable for use with Star Wars 
Miniatures Sets. 

e The Full-Color Map. This poster-sized map 
details the interior of the alien vessel 
Desolate, the locale of the major action in 
this adventure. 

e The Battle Counters. This strip of cut-apart 
counters features PC markers and other 
markers that can be used with the battle 
scenario in episode five. 

e Additional Materials. Other items needed 
to play this adventure include Star Wars: 
The Roleplaying Game, pencils, paper, and 
lots of six-sided dice. The Star Wars 
Sourcebook, The Star Wars Campaign Pack 
(which features an updated gamemaster 
screen), and Star Wars Miniatures Sets are 
useful but not necessary for play. 


Difficulty Numbers 
and Game Balance 

As GM, you must modify this adventure to 
fit your particular group of players. Use the 
Difficulty Number Scale found in the rules 
upgrade to accomplish this. 

For example, if the text says that PCs must 


make Easy con rolls to perform a given task, 
turn to the "Difficulty Number Scale’ in the 
upgrade. Assign a number between 6 and 10, 
depending on the level of skill of your PCs. 

Note that, in the text, attributes are 
capitalized and italicized, skills are only 
italicized. 

Also remember that the number of PCs 
and what template types they use affects the 
outcome of each encounter. This adventure 
is designed for six beginning player 


2 EDGE анығы тылда ға СА УША усы NK 


characters with a good mix of skills. If you 
have fewer PCs, you may need to scale down 
the encounters accordingly. 


Adventure Background 

Between realspace and hyperspace there 
exists another reality — otherspace. Here, 
space is slightly warped and light shines less 
brightly. It is a galaxy of things strange and 
familiar ... and deadly. 

Otherspace has become a final resting 
place for ships that travel the hyperspace 
lanes and lose their way. Those that once 
inhabited this dimension are gone. Only the 
ships remain, floating silently like 
mausoleums in a star-filled graveyard. One 
such ship is the massive vessel Desolate. lt 
epitomizes all that otherspace is: dark, 
compelling, dangerous. 

Drifting like a massive castle in space, 
Desolate is a beacon silently calling to its 
fellow derelicts. It draws the lost vessels like 
a strong navpulse in the middle of an ion 
storm. Many of the ships are connected to 
the larger craft, forming a patchwork of 
damaged starships. Many more orbit 
Desolate, caught in its pull and decaying 
slowly, steadily. 

Within the dark interior of the quilted 
craft, the Charon rule. These spider-like 
aliens sleep, waiting for their commander to 
lead them into the Void. 

The Charon — violent, evil, and totally 
alien to the Galactic Empire — are ruled by 
the being named Вег'аѕсо, he who bears the 
title "Final Prophet." Traveling from galaxy to 
galaxy, the Charon transformed every living 
world along the way, leaving dead and empty 
husks in their wake. Otherspace is the 
cumulative work of an ancient career. 

The Void must be honored and served by 
destroying the living, says an old Charon 
proverb. The ships which circle Desolate 
have provided Ber'asco with the knowledge 
that other bastions of life still exist. It is to 
these contaminated realms that Desolate 
must go to cleanse them of the hated life. 
The long awakening has begun, and soon the 
mighty ship shall make another journey. 


Recent Events 

The Rebel transport Celestial, converted 
into a prison ship, held the Imperial agents 
Commander Bane Nothos, the bounty 
hunters Zardra and EL-434, the pirate Celis 
Mott, and Governor Moff Ravik. 


The PCs were dispatched to meet the 
recently-loaded transport, their mission to 
pilot the ship to its destination and deal with 
any untoward incidents. But before they 
reached the vessel, things went wrong 
aboard Celestial. Bane Nothos broke free and 
released the other prisoners. The Imperials 
caused a power loss in the Rebel ship that 
damaged the Celestial's hyperdrive engine. 
The prison break turned into a mutiny when 
many of the Rebel crew, adrift with no 
immediate hope of rescue, submitted to the 
powerful leadership of Nothos and Ravik to 
see them through the crisis. Nothos 
promptly sent a distress call to the nearest 
Imperial base. 

Celestial's captain, forever loyal to the 
Alliance, played her final gambit before the 
Imperial forces arrived. Plotting a jump 
through hyperspace, despite the obvious 
dangers inherent in operating a mal- 
functioning hyperdrive, she punched in the 
command code. Ап explosion rocked the 
ship as it plunged through the shifting 
corridors of color that mark the hyperlanes. 
But the ship didnt stop there. With a burst 
of bright darkness and a tear in the colored 
wall, Celestial was deposited into 
otherspace. 


The Main NPCs 

Here are brief explanations of the major 
non-player characters, including their plans 
and motivations. More information is 
available in the pullout section and in the 
various episodes in which they appear. 


Bane Nothos: Once Bane Nothos was a 
District Commander with dreams of 
advancement up the Imperial ladder. But the 
event that should have been his greatest 
victory turned into his most bitter defeat. In 
the Roche asteroid field, Nothos was moving 
in to capture the Rebel leader Ackbar and 
his top-secret project when disaster struck. 
A group of Rebel agents actually used the 
secret weapon against him when Nothos 
ordered his flagship to attack before the rest 
of his blockade fleet arrived. Ackbar and the 
Rebels escaped, and Nothos was demoted to 
commander of an Outer Rim Territories 
patrol fleet. (See the Star Wars adventure 
Strike Force: Shantipole for more 
information.) Hoping to win back his 
position, Nothos again ordered his ship to 
move into a hostile situation without 


ST O Pe E м EAT 


adequate support. He was captured and 
placed aboard Celestial for transport to a 
safe location. 


Grand Moff Ravik: Imperial Governor Grand 
Moff Ravik has risen rapidly in the service of 
the Empire, but not quickly enough to keep 
pace with his ambition. Ravik coveted the 
position and influence of the late Grand Moff 
Tarkin. Ravik ruled Tolonda sector with a 
masterful iron hand. Fear kept his planets in 
line, and Ravik was a grandmaster of fear. 
But a Rebel strike team hijacked his shuttle 
on its way to an Imperial conclave. He was 
taken to Celestial for a different kind of 
meeting. While angered by the Rebels, he 
desires power more than revenge. 


Celis Mott: Pirate leader Celis Mott 
commanded a loosely associated armada 
that operates along the Nanth'ri space route. 
Recently he took an Imperial commission, 
selling his armada to the Empire. In 
exchange for the freedom to plunder 
merchant ships without fear of Star 
Destroyer reprisal, Celis Mott agreed to turn 
over any and all suspected Rebels 
encountered in such raids. А Rebel fleet was 
dispatched to put an end to the pirate 
attacks, and Mott was captured. Now he 
seeks to bargain his way free and return to 
his fleet — which he knows will disintegrate 
without his leadership. 


Zardra: Zardra, the mysterious bounty 
hunter who loves the challenge and danger 
associated with each hunt, has been busy 
since she took the job to find Adar Tallon 
(see the Star Wars adventure Tatooine 
Manhunt ). She has continued to work for the 
Empire, but a branch of the Imperials 
decided to single her out as the reason for 
the failure to capture Tallon. Zardra has 
since found herself the target of several 
bounty hunters. She never trusted the 
Empire, but her need to continue in their 
employ and her bent for danger causes her 
to the see the bounty hunters as a challenge 
which keeps her sharp rather than as a 
threat. Her last assignment went sour when 
her informant turned on her and sold 
information to the Alliance. Zardra was 
captured by the very Rebel she was 
tracking. Zardra vows to find the informant 
again. 


EL-434: EL-434 is one of the many assassin 
Droids now serving the Empire. EL-434 is 


nasty and enjoys what he does. His last 
mission was to invade a Rebel base and 
destroy everyone and everything. But the 
Rebels were ready for the Droid and 
subdued it. The assassin Droid overrode his 
self-destruct program, calculating that the 
Rebels will take him to an important base or 
safe-world. Then EL-434 will be able to 
accomplish his programming in grand style. 


Ber'asco: The leader of the alien Charon and 
commander of the strange starship Desolate, 
Ber'asco leads the Charon's cult of death. 
He has awaited the enlightenment promised 
with the extermination of life, but the 
answers have not yet come. After a long 
thought-sleep in the silence of otherspace, 
life awakens the Charon. Ber asco realizes 
his mission is not yet complete, and the 
word of the Void must be spread to another 
universe before his peoples’ promise can be 
fulfilled. 


Charon: Charon are spider-like beings from 
a far away portion of otherspace. Humanoid, 
these spider beings are tall and thin with 
multiple appendages. Sharp claws, used in 
combat, are coated with a poison that 
attacks an епету 5 central nervous system. 
Charon venom progressively destroys nerve 
cells. Victims are first rendered helpless by 
pain and hallucinations, dying when every 
nerve cell crumbles. Charon are excellent 
climbers, using their powerful limbs and 
claws to move over most obstacles. They 
produce a sticky webbing employed in a 
variety of uses. Not all Charon hated life. 
But Ber'asco's cult found meaning and 
purpose in the destruction of the universe; 
the other Charon were the first victims of 
the cult's beliefs. In their crusade against 
life, the Charon have developed a 
technology that uses life and lifelike 
processes to create undead machinery of 
destruction. They developed death mist, a 
compound similar to their natural poisons, 
with which to wage war on living star 
systems. The Charon aboard Desolate 
believe Ber'asco to be their Final Prophet, 
for he led the last campaigns of the great 
crusade which destroyed otherspace. His 
followers entered death-sleep until Ber asco 
found the answers for the Charon. But as 
more ships were lost into otherspace, select 
Charon awoke to investigate. 


SR EE SC СЫНЫ ЕРЕСЕК сат 


Summary 

The adventure begins with a group of 
Rebel heroes on their way to meet the 
Alliance transport Celestial. But when their 
ship comes out of hyperspace at the pre- 
arranged meeting place, the Rebels find 
themselves in the middle of a TIE fighter 
wing! 


| R ‘ead Aloud 


A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far 
away ... 

A small group of Rebels race across 
space to meet up with the Alliance 
transport Celestial. They have been 
ordered to take command of the vessel 
and its secret cargo, then see it safely to a 
hidden Rebel outpost in an as yet 
unnamed sector. 

But the Empire has a special interest in 
the secret cargo, and even now Imperial 
agents comb the galaxy in search of 
Celestial. What awaits the Rebels at the 
end of the jump may be more than they 
bargained for, and more than the galaxy 
is ready to handle ... 


Start the Adventure 

Locate the script in the pullout section. 
Assign each player a part, from "1st Rebel" 
to "6th Rebel." If you have fewer than six 
players, assign additional parts as 
necessary. Pass out the script. We suggest 
you make enough photocopies for everyone, 
but you can share the copy from the pullout 
if you dont have access to a copy machine. 
The player assigned the role of "1st Rebel" 
starts the script and the adventure is 
underway. 

When the players finish the script, pick up 
the action with "TIE Attack" below. 


pisode One 
The TIE Armada 


A 
A 


TIE Attack 
When the players finish the script, read 
the following passage out loud. 


Dozens upon dozens of TIE fighters 
scream past your ship. A blaster bolt 
explodes off your starboard bow as two 
TIEs take up an escort position alongside 
you. À voice crackles over your ship's 
comlink. "Unidentified vessel. You have 
entered a restricted sector of space. By 
order of the Empire, identify yourself 
immediately and stay on your present 
course. Апу deviation will be dealt with 
accordingly. Our next shot will not be a 
warning." 


It's time for the PCs to discuss their 
choices and options. But they must be quick 
about it. Have the voice break in on their 
discussion with threats and questions to 
speed them up and keep the tension high. 
Here are the important options the PCs will 
most likely consider. 


Fighting the TIEs 

The Rebel ship isn't as fast as the Imperial 
TIEs, but it can sustain more damage and 
has good shields. The Rebels best course of 
action is to fight and defend themselves as 
they prepare the ship to jump back to 
lightspeed. They should quickly realize that 
they cannot take on a full TIE wing and an 
Imperial Star Destroyer. Here is the way the 
combat should progress. 


Combat Round 1: As soon as the Rebels do 
anything that makes their ship deviate from 
its present course (speeding up, slowing 
down, turning), or if they refuse to identify 
themselves, or if they take a shot at the two 
nearest TIEs, then combat begins. The battle 
uses the "RPG Starship Combat" system. The 
two TIES start at short range to the Rebel 
ship. All other TIEs are considered to be at 
medium range, but none of these get 


з хыс i Aas ЕЕ re a ae ete ae ee ie O r 5 


pe Ж 


involved until the specified round. Тһе Star 
Destroyer is beyond long range this round. 


Combat Round 2: Four more TIEs join the 
battle, starting at medium range to the PCs 
ship. 


Combat Round 5: Six more TIEs join the 
battle, starting at medium range to the PCs 
ship. 


Combat Round 6: After six rounds of 
combat, the Imperial Star Destroyer begins 
to move into attack position. 


Combat Round 7, 8, 9: Two more TIEs join 
the battle each round, starting at medium 
range to the PCs' ship. 


Combat Round 10: Eight TIEs attack, 
starting at medium range and using 
combined fire to their best advantage. 


Combat Round 13-: On the thirteenth 
round, the ISD begins to fire its tractor at the 
Rebel ship from long range. If the Rebel ship 
is hit it is captured. Go on to the section 
entitled "Captured!" 


The Rebels’ ship is The Long Shot, the craft 
detailed in the Star Wars Campaign Pack. Its 
Statistics are provided here for ease of play. 
The TIEs are standard TIE/In starfighters. 


Rebel Modified Short Hauler*: Hyperdrive 
multiplier хі. Sublight speed 3D; 
maneuverability 1D; hull 4D. Weapons: Two 


К Rc 
ARE ————————— 


laser cannons (fire separately); fire control 
3D; damage 5D. Shields: 3D. 

*These statistics are for The Long Shot , 
the short hauler supplied to the PCs by the 
Alliance. If the PCs have a different ship, use 
its stats instead. 


TIE/In Starfighter: Hyperdrive multiplier 
zero. Sublight speed 5D; maneuverability 2D; 
hull 2D. Weapons: Two laser cannons (fire 
linked); fire control 2D; combined damage 
oD. Shields: none. 

Starship piloting 3D+1; Starship gunnery 
30+1. 


Fleeing the Battle 

The Rebels can attempt to flee the scene at 
any time, either as their first option or after 
a few rounds of combat. If they open up their 
ships engine and try to speed away right 
from the beginning, use the combat round 
schedule above with the following 
modification; if the the Rebels start the 
calculation for the jump to lightspeed before 
speeding away, there will be four rounds of 
combat before the jump to lightspeed can be 
made (Imperial sensor sweeps of the ship 
would pick up impulses from the nav 
computer as it made its calculations). lf the 
Rebels are making a hasty jump, the 
Imperials have no time to react. Go to "Тһе 
Jump" below. 

If they start making calculations after 
combat begins (assuming they fought from 
the start without trying to race away), they 
must survive for 12 combat rounds while 
they build up speed and make their 
calculations for the jump. They are, of 
course, free to try and make a hasty jump, 
which takes a round. 


Surrender 

If the Rebels decide that they cannot fight 
or escape such a large force, they may 
decide to surrender. If this happens, go to 
“Captured!” below. 


Captured! 

If the PCs surrender or are captured by the 
Star Destroyer's tractor beams you will have 
to improvise a storyline. So it is probably 
better to give the Rebels a break ... but make 
them earn it. 

If they are captured by a tractor beam, 
they could try to jump to hyperspace while 
in the beam; with such a screwy jump the 
players should not be too surprised to end 
up in otherspace. The Rebels could play 


o VERDE a es Te es adr oe с ЧА 


chicken with the ISD, running full throttle up 
the beam. Captain Westen would turn the 
beam off rather than severely damage his 
Star Destroyer. 

If the Rebels get dragged into the hangar 
bay, there could be a confiscated smuggler's 
vessel also in the bay. The Rebels could 
hide and make a run for the ship, or blaze 
away and make a run for it. 

If the players get stuck in the detention 
block, you are on your own. The Star Wars 
adventure Starfall provides details on the 
inside of the ISD's cousin, the Victory-class 
Star Destroyer, if you really want to run a 
breakout adventure. 


ut-Away to Star Destroyer Bridge 


As the PCs either fight or flee from 
the TIEs, pause the action in order to cut 
to the following scene. Read aloud: 


EXTERIOR: IMPERIAL STAR DESTROYER 
RELENTLESS. The massive ship of war 
moves gracefully against the backdrop of 
space, turning to meet the сатеға as it 
zooms in to focus on the command tower. 
The scene shifts to reveal ... 

INTERIOR: RELENTLESS BRIDGE. The 
vessel's commander stands before the 
forward viewport, watching the flashing 
battle-dance of TIE fighters. A lesser officer 
waits nervously beside him. 

"Lieutenant, have you projected the 
Celestial'Ss probable jump routes?" 
Captain Westen hisses. 

"Sir, we have several possible 
coordinates to which they could have 
jumped, but none stand out." 

Westen turns on the junior officer. " But 
this Rebel ship is here to meet the 
transport. When the crew is in detention, 1 
shall question them. Perhaps they have 
better information than you do, 
Lieutenant. Parlan disappointed Lord 
Vader — I have no such intention. If I fail, | 
do not intend to fail alone. Understood 
Lieutenant?" 

The Lieutenant swallows and nods, 
remembering to salute a fraction of a 
second late. 

Cut to... 

INTERIOR: REBEL SHIP LONG SHOT. 


The Jump 

As the PCs prepare to make the jump to 
lightspeed, read the following passage out 
loud: 


More and more TIE fighters close in on 
your ship as you finish programming your 
astrogation computer. The calculations 
have been made and a course has been 
plotted. Now all you have to do is punch 
home the command. 


(Ask for an astrogation roll at this point to 
increase the suspense. Nod when the player 
informs you of his or her roll, then pick up 
the narrative.) 


The hyperdrive makes a grinding, 
popping noise. For a split second nothing 
changes; your ship continues to hurl 
through realspace as dozens of TIEs pull 
steadily closer. Then, all at once, reality 
shifts. 


Describe to the Rebels the different feel to 
this particular jump through hyperspace. As 
their ship moves faster and faster, the 
streaks of color begin to break up and drift 
away. Weird holes appear in the hyperlane 
corridor, holes that exit into pinwheels of 
light or maws of absolute darkness. The ship 
shakes, the instruments go wild, and 
suddenly they arrive at a place they have 
never imagined. They have reached 
"otherspace." 


Otherspace 
Read: 


Your ship emerges from the strangest 
light jump you have ever experienced. But 
something remains not quite right. Instead 
of the ebony sea of space, you stare out 
into a storm-gray pattern of nothingness. 
Swirls of colored gases break up the ashy 
expanse like jagged bolts of lightning 
cutting through billowing thunder clouds. 
But the most alien sight of all is the stars. 
Not millions of pinpoints of dazzling light, 
but billions of holes of shining dark that 
pepper the storm-gray space. 


Dien ES V VC ыйын. EN тс EEUU FPE EY EM 


А 
A 


pisode Two 


Celestial Found 


Summary 

In this episode the PCs find the Celestial, 
floating quietly before a swirling cloud of 
fiery gas. Within the transport, the PCs try 
to discover what happened aboard the ship 
as they wander its deserted corridors. 


Examining the Rebels Ship 

When the immediate danger of a squadron 
of TIE fighters is past, the Rebels may want 
to determine the status of their ship. Here is 
what they can figure out using their own 
skills and equipment. 


Checking the Hyperdrive. Any PC with 
Technical skills can examine the ship's 
hyperdrive engine. An Easy starship repair 
roll or better indicates that the unit is 
damaged. An Easy Perception roll allows a 
PC to attribute the damage to the initial 
collision with the TIE fighter when they first 
came out of hyperspace to meet Celestial. It 
is apparent that the damage caused the 
hyperdrive to malfunction and burn out. lt 
cannot be used again without major repairs, 
and the ship lacks the spare parts to make 
such repairs. А replacement hyperdrive 
motivator must be found or built — 
cannibalizing the motivator they have the 
Rebels are still short five parts: a hypercoil, 
an influx capacitor, a power coupler, a 
4-axial stabilizer, and a геаіѕрасе 
compensator. 


Checking the Sublight Engines. The 
sublight engines work. While they cannot be 
used to get the PCs home, these engines do 
provide maneuverability in this strange 
environment. 


Examining the Nav Computer. A Moderate 
astrogation roll allows a PC to gain 
information from the ship's onboard nav 
computer. The nav computer plotted a 
course through hyperspace that the 
hyperdrive was unable to match. Instead, 


the damaged drive unit shot the ship into 
hyperspace — and beyond into a different 
dimension. À course can be plotted back, 
but the ship can travel that course only if 
the hyperdrive unit is repaired. If asked to 
determine where the Rebels have ended up, 
the nav computer uses its semantics circuits 
to name a place that is not realspace or 
hyperspace. The computer names it 
"otherspace." 


Attempting a Sensor Sweep. While clouds 
of charged particles obscure and block 
detailed sweeps, some knowledge can be 
gleaned. АП sensor operations have +5 
added to the difficulty number; sensor 
operations is a Knowledge skill. Successful 
scanning reveals a ship approximately 120 
sublight units distant off the ship's forward 
right arc, but it is near a particularly dense 
energy cloud that masks further details. 


Using the Subspace Radio. Scanning 
through the full range of communication 
bands turns up an almost totally silent 
galaxy. There is no traffic talk, no warning 
beacons, no subspace chatter, nothing. The 
only channel with anything of interest 
contains a carrier signal on an Alliance 
frequency. No message comes across the 
open channel. It's as though someone 
turned on his com unit and then stepped 
away from the controls. An Easy astrogation 
roll allows a PC to follow the signal to its 
source near the dense cloud picked up on 
the sensors. Following the signal leads the 
PCs to "The Nebula" section below. 


The Nebula 


As the Rebels approach the nebula, read: 


There, against the steel-gray expanse, 
spins a rainbow nebula. The cloud of 
swirling colors throws out waves of 
energies of every type. You notice your 


0 л е лө es a Sy COCHE ES D TOT NEN 


ship's instrumentation acting strangely. 
Readouts randomize and screens blink off 
and on. The miles-long cloud produces 
static that obscures your sensor sweeps 
and limits visual perception. Between the 
cloud and your ship floats another vessel. 


This is the Alliance transport Celestial, 
dead in space. Life support seems minimal. 
PCs making Moderate Perception rolls 
notice that several escape pods have been 
jettisoned but that the cargo racks are still 
full. The Rebel ship can dock with the larger 
vessel only at the airlock over the engines or 
at the docking station under the cargo pods. 
Docking with Celestial requires a Moderate 
starship piloting roll as the transport is 
drifting and tumbling, its engines cold and 
inoperable. 


Exploring Celestial 

The Rebel transport Celestial has two 
upper decks, and rows of cargo pod racks 
tucked snugly under the hull shell. The only 
noticeable damage is a dark scorch near the 
engines. А Moderate starship repair roll 
allows a PC to determine that the damage 


о therspace 
Otherspace is a universe beyond the 


bounderies of realspace and hyperspace. 
Unlike the blue-black expanse of 
realspace, otherspace is a silver-gray void 
filled with clouds of energy and dark 
stars. 

The charged clouds and swirling spirals 
of energy form storms which can wreak 
havoc with navigational computers, 
sensors, and communications equipment. 

The dark stars appear as holes in the 
fabric of the gray expanse. While planets 
orbit these voids, all are cold, lifeless 
rocks. Many are shattered and blasted 
smooth, the result of the Charon's 
thorough violence passing through this 
galaxy. 

Devoid of life, otherspace now serves as 
a way station for ships lost in hyperspace. 
Most arrive here damaged and adrift. The 
energy storms serve to further damage 
and confuse their remaining instruments. 
Many fall to the Charon. Only those 
recently arrived intrude upon the silence 
of otherspace. 


реет б АІ “255-222 N 


PT: 


ae 


occurred internally. Оп а Difficult 
Perception roll a PC spots strands hanging 
from the lower docking platform; (Charon 
webbing). In the odd light of otherspace the 
strands have a crystalline gleam. 

The Celestial is a dying ship. It is cold, 
dark, and its air is stale. Some rooms have 
no gravity, and emergency lights are all that 
shine in the dim corridors and chambers. 
Refer to the ship descriptions below for 
details as to what the Rebels can see and 
what they can find on Celestial. 


Celestial Room Descriptions 

Each room aboard Celestial is numbered 
to match the map in the pullout section. 
Please refer to it to aid your descriptions. 


1. Upper Airlock. One of the two places 
where the Rebel ship can dock to Celestial , 
this standard airlock opens into an upper 
chamber. The chamber contains a locker, a 
ship-wide com unit, and a ladder leading 
down. The locker contains two vac-suits, 
two medpacs, a glow rod, and a rations kit. 
The ladder descends to a vestibule. 

2. Rec Room. This chamber is dedicated to 
relaxation and exercise. Gravity gone, the 
Rebels see а small gym set, а holochess 
table, and a zee-gee table (a game popular 
among the Corellian traders) floating about 
the room. 


elestial's Tale 1: Imperial Escape 


The following information is for you, 
the gamemaster, only. Do not reveal any of 
this data unless the PCs search the 
appropriate areas within Celestial and 
make the proper rolls. 

Bane Nothos sat waiting, impatiently 
twisting his massive Imperial signet ring 
around the first finger of his right hand. 
He didn't like waiting. He hadnt liked 
waiting when he had been an Imperial 
District Commander. He liked waiting even 
less now, as a prisoner aboard the 
Celestial. What he was waiting for finally 
happened. The service Droid bearing 
Nothos's evening meal entered the cell 
and proffered the dinner tray. Nothos 
accepted the tray a bit more slowly than 
usual, allowing the guards to pass by his 
cell. He squeezed his ring between thumb 
and forefinger. The ring's single-charge 
laser proved sufficient to disable the 
Droid. Nothos reprogrammed the docile 
mechanical, watched it leave, and sat to 
eat his meal. One last time, he waited. 

Nothos wiped his lips, placing his 
napkin on his empty dinner plate. The 
Imperial, plate, and napkin were thrown in 
separate directions amid the metallic 
shrieks and the tumbling throes of 
Celestial being torn from its course. 
Nothos smiled. The reprogrammed Droid 
had done its work. The unsynchronized 
engines had heated themselves to slag 
and brought the vessel to a halt. 

In the confusion of the disaster and in 
the dim light of the emergency power 
system, Bane pushed at the nonfunc- 
tioning lock and left his cell. He moved to 
Grand Moff Ravik's detention cubicle and 
opened the door. Ravik was standing. 

"Situation report, Commander." 

Nothos blinked once before replying to 
Ravik's order. "The Celestial's crew is 
ordinary, Grand Moff. Ordinary men panic 
when their ship loses power and mobility. 
Survival becomes paramount." 

"Scared men are easy to command," said 
Ravik, "given the promise of safety." 

"Some will stay loyal to Gryphon." 

Ravik saw EL-434 silently exit its 
detention cubicle. A smile twitched on the 
Grand Moff's face. "I am sure we will think 
of something, Commander." 


Á——— Á———— Ó—‏ —— چ ص 
TIE EE EE eee‏ 


3. Galley. Inside are scanovens, sonic 
cleansers, and a storage pantry. This room 
is strung with Charon webbing. They have 
taken what few stores were left for testing 
by their bioscientists. An Easy Perception 
roll reveals scratches and gouges on the 
equipment, signs of cursory Charon 
investigation. 

4. The Engine Room. The engine room 
spans two levels, forming a large open area 
around the main engines. The gravity here is 
very weak. A series of catwalks and ladders 
connect the levels and the various stations, 
consoles, controls, and maintenance ports. 
Smoke fills this area, and scorched and 
shattered equipment is evident. PCs making 
Easy starship repair rolls can learn that 
something unsynchronized the engines, 
destroying them and knocking out power to 
the ship. Without power, the air circulation 
system, life support, sublight drive, and 
most computer operations are impossible. 
Backup batteries provide enough energy to 
the computers to maintain limited access 
and data retrieval. The hyperdrive is an 
unusable, fused hulk. Nothing from this unit 
is salvageable. 

9. Tech Shop. The tech shop features а 
limited repair station that can also be used 
to fabricate some machinery. It is useless 
without ship's power. 

6. Medical Bay. This rudimentary medical 
bay lacks most of the basic comforts. Two 
beds and a diagnosis computer make up the 
facilities. PCs searching here find that the 
ships small bacta tank has been removed, 
with claw marks left as evidence of the 
Charon theft. Most of the storage lockers 
have been raided, and all have been webbed 
closed. Cutting through the webbing 
requires a Moderate Strength roll; inside the 
lockers are four medpacs. 

7. Crew Quarters. These spartan chambers 
feature double bunks, desks, chairs, and 
storage lockers. А miniature asteroid field of 
crew memorabilia spins about the room. 
Some clothing has been taken, but much 
remains. With Moderate search rolls, the 
PCs uncover two medpacs, a glow rod, a coil 
of syntherope, a cube of detonite, and a 
blaster pistol. 

8. The Bridge. Through the blasted door to 
the bridge the PCs see a deserted room 
made all the more eerie by blinking 
instruments and the strange light cast 
through the viewport by the nebula cloud. 
Battery power temporarily keeps the 


1 1 о о ее ME EN 


monitors and computers operational. А 
Moderate security roll allows the PCs to play 
back the ship's log. The final log entry pops 
up as a holographic image, placing 
transparent figures on the bridge beside the 
PCs. The holorecord plays out as follows. 
Read: 


Ghostly holographic images appear upon 
the bridge as the ship's final log entry 
plays back. A thin man in a severe 
Imperial uniform is visible through an 
arched doorway near the com station; 
crew members and a heavily armed Droid 
stand next to him. "Imperial emergency 
code three-delta-delta," he says. "This is 
Grand Moff Ravik. I have taken command 
of the Rebel vessel Celestial and await 
pickup by the ISD Relentless. 1 am 
broadcasting our coordinates now. Request 
immediate response as the situation is still 
fluid." 

Ravik's sentence is punctuated by an 
explosion at the bridge door, blaster fire 
pouring through the breach. А woman, 
wearing the rank of a Rebel transport 
captain, leads the attack. The Droid and 
nearby crew members fire at the attacking 
party as Ravik moves out of view. А voice 
crackles from an unseen com: "Celestial, 


this is Relentless. We have your signal and 
are on our way." 

The Rebel captain glances out the bridge 
viewport and her face tightens. She then 
runs to the helm and hits a button. 
Immediately the hyperdrive is activated 
and the ghostly images fade into streaks of 
light. 


The record monitor shows that the ship 
entered hyperspace cold, without any 
astrogation calculations. This further 
depleted the remaining power and ended 
any additional recording. 

As the holorecord fades, the PCs see a new 
sight through the bridge viewport. А large 
ship emerges from the swirling cloud of 
color that fills the steel-gray expanse. It is 
huge, dark, and alien to all known ship- 
design theories. Around it, orbiting like tiny 
satellites, are hundreds of smaller ships. 
Each appears lifeless and dead, as still and 
cold as the giant craft. 

9. Communications Station. This 
sophisticated com station contains a 
subspace radio, a subspace monitor, 
recording controls, and other standard 
communications equipment. А PC can check 
the communications record (by making an 
Easy computer programming roll) to 


elestial's Tale 2: Exodus 


А mutinous crew member applied а 
medpac to Grand Moff Ravik as the smoke 
cleared the damaged bridge. Zardra and 
EL-434 herded the Rebel prisoners to the 
lower loading dock while Mott and Nothos 
retrieved what data they could. The pirate 
gave a long, dramatic sigh which annoyed 
Ravik nearly as much as his wound. 

"She's dead, Moff," said Mott, " Celestial 
has had it. We couldn't build a solid 
system boat out of whats left." 

"Nothos, what have you got on that 
asteroid or planetoid...whatever...out 
there," asked Ravik. 

Bane Nothos looked out the viewport. 
He looked back at his sensors. Then back 
out the viewport, a pause, and then a 
slight shake of his head. "Grand Moff, | 
believe the object out there is a ship." 

"Abandoned like all the rest? Signs of 
life?" 

Nothos hesitated. "It is not abandoned. 
But the life scanners are giving confusing 
readings." 

Ravik rose, waving off the aid of the 
crewman. "Your opinion, Commander." 

No hesitation from Nothos this time. "If 
its a ship, | can command her." 

Ravik looked Nothos over. Celis Mott 
shifted his attention to a dead readout as 
Nothos met the Grand Moff's gaze. The 
pirate waited until he heard a soft noise 
from the Grand Moff, and then glanced up 
to see Ravik nod curtly. 

“We now have a destination for the life 
pods. Get us there, Commander.” 


discover the last com transmission was to 
the /SD Relentless. 

10. Captain's Office. This well-appointed 
room contains a desk, chair, and couch. One 
wall is made of transparisteel, providing a 
breath-taking vista. Data pads and other 
records here show this to be the office of 
Captain Alain Gryphon, commander of the 
transport Celestial. 

11. Captain's Quarters. This stateroom 
contains a large bed, a private bath area, 
and a locked storage bin. It takes a Moderate 
security roll to open the bin. Inside, the PCs 
find а data pad with coded information. А 
Difficult security roll breaks the data pad's 


BL V mm € —— —— EE 
nmn ګګ گگگ‎ 


code and reveals Gryphon's mission. She 
was to pick up a group of Imperial prisoners 
and prepare the transport for a two-month 
journey. She was to meet a group of Rebel 
agents who would take responsibility for 
and command of the transport for the 
duration of the journey, which was to take 
them on an evasive course to an Alliance 
safe-world. There the prisoners would be 
turned over to Alliance authorities, and 
command of Celestial would be returned to 
Gryphon. 

12. Storage. Clothing, sleep gear, food, 
water, and other essential supplies for the 
long trip Celestial was undertaking drift 
throughout this chamber. 

13. Detainment Cells. These storage rooms 
have been converted to detainment cells in 
order to transport the prisoners safely. 
While not as escape-proof as an Imperial 
detention block, these sealed chambers are 
designed to hold most normal prisoners. 
Unfortunately, without power for the 
magnetic seals, the doors can be pushed 
open with little trouble. Each cell is a bare 
chamber containing a bench/sleeping 
platform along the far wall. Only five of 
these cells were occupied: Celis Mott in A, 
Nothos in B, Ravik in E. C and D still have 
traces of their recent inhabitants. 

Cell C. This cell, once occupied by the Droid 
EL-434, shows signs of damage. Long 
scrapes and gashes in the metal walls 
indicate something with a lot of strength 
was attempting to escape from the confining 
chamber. 

Cell D. The air of this cell is redolent of a 
heady scent, with an underlying touch of 
Togorian belladonna. This was Zardras cell. 
Any PCs who met her in Tatooine Manhunt 
will recognize her exotic, deadly scent. 

14. Loading Area and Lower Docking 
Platform. The Charon entered through this 
platform. Charon warriors immediately set 
up a defensive position — the hundreds of 
strands of webbing are the result. Some of 
the strands are thinner than а man's finger 
by half; these resist damage with a Strength 
of 2D. Others have been braided together to 
form supporting cables thicker than a 
Wookiee's thigh. These last аге 
tremendously strong and resistant to 
damage; a direct hit from a blaster pistol 
usually results in a scorch mark and a small 
divot in the webbing (they resist damage 
with a Strength of 9D+2). 


12 SEE OE INCENSUM ы улы Яс; салыры сс ИЯТ 


elestial's Tale 3: Probe 


A voice awoke Berasco from 
thought-sleep. Not the deep, reassuring 
voice of the Void, but the vibrating rasp of 
one of the bioscientists. Ber asco focused 
most of his eyes on the speaker, now 
hearing words as well as sound. 

"..again. The disease has even invaded 
our vessel. Our numbers are few enough 
that —" 

Вегавсо5 synchronized three-limbed 
motion silenced the bioscientist. "Pull 
warriors from death-sleep. Have them 
report on the pathology of the disease 
within our vessel. Take warriors and 
your brethren to their ship. Determine 
metabolism, biodefenses; form eval- 
uation for resistance to treatment. 
Prepare the mists. Pull me from thought- 
sleep when you have or need answers. 
Now leave me." 

The bioscientist prostrated herself, 
genuflecting on all limbs. Before she had 
righted herself, Berasco sank again into 
thought-sleep. 


The floor of this open area is made up of 
divided lift platforms. Sections of the lift can 
be lowered to the docking platform, or the 
entire floor can descend to haul up larger 
loads; currently webbing binds together all 
but one of the sections. 

A computer access port in one corner 
shows signs of damage, and a Droid lies 
nearby. An Easy Droid repair roll shows that 
its power center was disabled using a low- 
powered laser of some sort. Its 
programming was altered and its computer 
access jack has suffered a power feedback 
surge that melted the Droid's circuits. А 
Moderate Droid repair roll allows a PC to 
get the Droid to talk for a few brief seconds. 
It repeats back its last programming. "Find 
computer access port. Plug in. Relay signal 
to power cells to fire simultaneously." The 
Droid then shudders, and its memory 
circuits short out. 

The lower docking platform is surrounded 
by five escape pod berths. Four of these 


berths are empty. Should the Rebels want 
to use the last life pod, they have to free it 
from the criss-cross of webbing which 
secures it to the floor (the net of webbing 
resists damage with a Strength of 5D+1). 

15. Guard Station. This control room 
contains detainment cell monitors and other 
security equipment. There are four dead 
guards here. The Charon have taken two 
others as samples, and a PC making a 
Moderate Perception roll can see that two 
bodies were dragged from here. АРС making 
an Easy computer programming roll can 
access the prisoner roster. The following 
information scrolls across the monitor 
screen. "Prisoners: Extremely Dangerous: 
Grand Moff Ravik; Imperial District 
Commander Bane Nothos; assassin Droid 
EL-434; the bounty hunter Zardra; Nanth'ri 
pirate leader Celis Mott." 

16. Guards' Quarters. Six bunks and six 
storage bins are all that make up this 
chamber. Nothing of interest can be found in 
the personal effects. 

17. Sensor Suite Station. An open archway 
leads from the guard station to this area, 
and a ladder ascends up to the 
communications station. Charon can- 
nibalization has made this equipment 
unusable. 


The Next Step 
Before the Rebels travel to the Desolate, 
present the read-aloud section below. 


ut-Away to Desolate 
Read aloud: 


EXTERIOR: SWIRLING NEBULA. The 
camera pans across the expanse of color 
and drifting mist that makes up the 
swirling nebula. It moves closer, passing 
drifting ships that have become nothing 
more than space debris, to settle upon the 
huge, dark ship that emerges from the 
nebula cloud. Alien in design, the ship 
appears as just another dead wreck in the 
galactic sea of otherspace. 

Then, without warning, eerie lights begin 
to flick on. The dead ship begins to stir ... 


A Ra 
ARE C 


А 
А 


pisode Тһгее 


Summary 

This episode takes the Rebel PCs through 
the sea of abandoned starships and into the 
alien craft Desolate. On the first level of the 
giant vessel they explore Desolate's strange 
architecture and technology, discover the 
fate of Captain Gryphon, battle the pirate 
Celis Mott, and experience the mind-altering 
effects of "death mist." 


The Sea of Dead Ships 

The approach to Desolate takes the Rebels 
through the myriad wrecked spacecraft 
orbiting the alien ship. Read: 


You maneuver your ship through an 
armada of derelict craft. The scene 
reminds you of a busy spaceport with one 
important difference — the silence. These 
vessels are deathly quiet. No subspace 
chatter fills the void, no engines flare to 
adjust courses, no running lights glow 
warmly on these empty hulks. There floats 
a startug. There a freighter spins wildly. 
And there, beyond the blast boats and 
cruisers and transports, awaits the largest 
of these desolate vessels. As you watch, 
strange domes on each end of the 
unusually designed craft begin to glow 
with an otherworldly light. 


The wrecked ships loosely orbit the giant 
craft. As the PCs' ship gets closer, the 
congestion thickens. The Rebel pilot must 
make three Moderate starship piloting rolls 
to navigate safely through the field of 
wrecks. Every failed roll indicates a collison 
with a wreck. Crashing into wrecks causes 
3D damage against the Rebel vessel. 


Entering a Wreck 

If the Rebels want to investigate any of the 
abandoned ships, they must make a 
Moderate starship piloting roll to dock with 
a wildly spinning wreck. A failed roll means 


_ Desolate Awaits 


that the Rebel ship collides with the wreck 
(taking 3D damage) and careens off it. 

Inside the wrecks, the PCs find similarities 
between these ships and Celestial. The 
vessels were all deserted quickly, and only 
essentials have been taken. Strange strands 
of sticky webbing can be found, most 
frequently in medical and engineering 
sections. In the engine room, the PCs 
discover that the engines — specifically the 
hyperdrives — have sustained damage. 
Moreover, the equipment has been torn 
apart and major pieces of machinery are 
missing. 


Entering the Unknown Ship 

Refer to the full-color map and the 
gamemaster's map key in the pullout section 
when describing the interior of the alien 
vessel. 

There are four obvious entry points on 
Desolate's exterior. These openings are 
evenly spaced along the outer hull, each 
near a concentration of patchwork wrecks. 
One opening contains the four crashed 
escape pods from Celestial , and the details 
that follow assume this to be the entry point 
the Rebels choose to use. If they opt for a 
different entry point, adjust the descriptions 
accordingly. 

The cave-like opening looms before you 
as you guide your ship toward the massive 
vessel. The opening is big enough for your 
ship to enter, and the area inside is 
suitable for landing. You pass through the 
cave mouth and meet resistance. A 
transparent membrane of some sort covers 
the opening, but your ship passes through 
it unharmed. 

The membrane maintains the vessel's 
atmosphere. Ships may pass through it, as 
the membrane automatically seals itself 
when breached. Inside the cave is a large, 


ес Ae Ы ск: БАРЫ ТК 


T | he Alien Vessel Desolate 


The Charon craft Desolate is an 
amorphous mass rising over 450 meters 
from base to summit. Domes of eerie light 
cap each end of the massive vessel, and a 
smaller dome engraved with a weird, 
weblike design, tops one rocky 
outcropping. Weapon pods dot the hull, 
growing from the surface material. These 
pods open to reveal huge, oddly-angled 
projectile weapons, but when closed they 
appear as disfiguring lumps upon the 
vessel's rocky exterior. 

Hundreds of wrecked craft orbit 
Desolate, but many of their kin have been 
meshed with the amorphous vessel. These 
ships cling to the jagged surface, 
connected by thin, sticky webs and in 
some places even fused with Desolate 's 
outer hull. These wrecks form a 
patchwork of damaged ships that cover 
the exterior surface. Near a large 
concentration of these quilted vessels, a 
cave opens into Desolate itself. 

Inside, Desolate is a hollow cavity 
formed around a thick, central power 
core. The core pulses with inner energy 
and has some disturbing qualities. 
Created to be a living ship by an unknown 
race, the Charon have taken Desolate and 
made it their own. In doing so, however, 
they "improved" upon the vessel. Now 
Desolate is dead — or, better yet, undead 
— warped into the very essence of the 
Charons beliefs. The ship does what living 
things do; it absorbs material for energy, it 
grows, and it repairs itself. It should be 
alive — but it isn t. 

Thin strands of hollow tubing connect 
the undead core to the cavity walls. The 
energy that runs through the tubing 
creates beads of light that give the interior 
a golden glow, much like sun-sparkled dew 
upon a spider's web. 

Four overlapping decks surround the 
central core, each connected by crawl 
tubes. The bottom area of the ship is filled 
with thick extensions that branch off the 
power core and attach to the cavity wall 
like the roots of some massive tree. 
Around these extensions swirls a red- 
tinged mist. 


A Se ta РТ ЫҚ а БЕТИНЕ o 


flat landing deck within a rocky pod. An 
opening in the pod wall leads further into 
Desolate's depths, but the ship cannot fit 
through this passage. 

If the PCs land in the same area as the 
escape pods, they can tell all of the escape 
pods arrived intact. The atmosphere within 
Desolate is thick and wet, but breathable by 
the PCs. They do not need breath masks or 
vac suits. 

The PCs find a common shipboard pet 
wobbling about the cave. А Very Easy alien 
races roll indentifies the pet as an Adoris 
Feline, a small catlike animal favored by 
many freighter and long hauler crews. But 
something is wrong. Force users making a 
Very Easy sense roll detect no life within the 
creature. In fact, the feline registers as a 
total absence of the Force. Easy medicine 
rolls determine that while the creature 
mimics life functions, it has been altered and 
is no longer alive. Most of the nerve cells are 
destroyed, some replaced with 
mircomechanical switches, circuits and 
fibers. 


Platform One Encounters 
and Events 


The Connecting Ramp 

Another nearly-invisible membrane 
stretches across the portal that leads 
further into Desolate. The Rebels can feel it 
reseal itself as they pass through it. On the 
other side of the membrane a long, three- 
meter wide ramp stretches from the entry 
pod to a series of platforms that appear to 
float within the inner cavity. Thin tubes of 
light extend in all directions, connecting the 
central power core with the cavity walls. Far 
below the ramp, barely discernible in the 
deep gloom, is a thick, red mist. The ramp 
leads to platform one and the great hall. 


The Great Hall 

This irregularly-shaped chamber features a 
wide, open area nestled between three- 
meter tall organic-rock walls. The smooth 
floor is engraved with an unknown star map 
overlain with a constricting web pattern. 


The Growing Chamber 

This large area, built around the pulsing 
power core, is filled with pods that grow 
from the chambers floor and walls. These 
pods have stony peels and thorny tendrils 


suffered grievous injuries from sharp, 
poisoned claws. She doesnt have long to 
live. 

A Moderate medicine roll, or an Easy 
control pain roll, can be made to alleviate 
some of her pain and make her coherent 
| A enough to speak. She says: 
| eit "This mission hasn't gone so well, has it 
f к friends. Му crew? Did you save my crew? 
The shadows stalked us from the moment 
we entered this abomination. We took 


“, 


iN 
№ 


Шы 3% 


that form canopied paths between the 
irregularly spaced rows. Force-using 
characters can detect no life within these 
growths (see the sidebar on "Desolate and 
the Force”). 

The hard outer peels can be broken to 
reveal thick yellow paste that bubbles out of 
the breached pods. Near the power core, 
broken pods are scattered everywhere. The 
paste from these pods forms pools around 
the core. Thin tendrils twist and wind from 
the core into the pools, sucking the paste 
back into the pulsing column. 


Event One: 
The Fate of Captain Gryphon 

As the PCs explore the growing chamber, 
read: 


The area ahead has been disturbed. 
Tendrils and pods have been crushed by 
reckless passage, and others show deep 
scarring from blaster fire. Scraps of torn 
cloth hang from thorny roots. À blaster lies 
discarded to one edge of the path, and 
more of the weblike material covers 
specific patches. 


After some moments of examining this site 
of conflict, the PCs hear a low moan. It 
comes from a thick clump of overgrowth a 
few meters off the path, where a mortally- 
wounded Captain Alain Gryphon lies. An 
Easy medicine roll reveals that she has 


precautions, but it's hard to see shadows in 
the dark. And their bite! A shadow 
dragged off Conners, and then the 
darkness itself attacked. Ravik and the 
others ran, leaving me and my men to fight 
alone. But you can't fight shadows, not in 
the dark ..." 


Captain Gryphon shudders as the poison 
finishes her. No trace of the rest of her crew, 
Ravik, or the "attacking shadows" can be 
found in this area. 


The Overlook 
The growing chamber gives way to an area 
that overlooks the ship's lower cavity. Read: 


The growing paths lead to a flat expanse. 
Some jagged rocks rise from the chamber 
floor, but these are not tall and do little to 


D esolate and the Force 
Force-using player characters find 


the alien ship Desolate disturbing. The 
Charon have taken what was once a living 
being and removed the living spark. Now 
it is nothing more than an automaton 
whose very existence disturbs the natural 
order. 

Those characters sensitive to the Force 
feel uneasy as they wander through the 
craft. The deeper into the craft they go, 
the worse the feelings get. Here is 
something that is dead, yet it has not 
been allowed to die. That is not the way of 
nature, and the resulting disturbance in 
the Force is almost painful to sensitive 
PCs. 

Desolate registers as an actual absence 
of Force. Like a black hole, the craft sucks 
in Force but does not return any of the 
energy that binds all living things 
together. It is an abomination that goes 
against all Jedi training. 


— M MÀ!  n— BB SS 


о ЛОР ЕТЕ СТР ЕСЕР АСТЫ 


ri PULLOUT SECTION 


О therspace 
Adventure Script 


Use the following script to start your adventure. Your gamemaster will tell you what part 


(or parts) to read. 


Start the Script 


Ist Rebel: Hyperspace is so beautiful. The 
colors remind me of Kallakean rainbows. 


2nd Rebel: We get a priority assignment 
from Alliance High Command and you think 
about rainbows! 


3rd Rebel: Some assignment. So far all we 
got were jump coordinates and a holodisk. 


4th Rebel: Speaking of the holodisk, it's time 
to play it and get our orders. 


GM: A holo-image appears before you and 
Commander Avalon addresses you. "As you 
approach the end of your jump, be advised 
that you are to meet the Alliance transport 
Celestial . You are to take command of the 
ship and see it to its destination. Further 
coordinates will be provided in due course." 


oth Rebel: How come they never tell us 
everything all at once? How can we work like 
this? 


6th Rebel: Would you rather jeopardize a 
mission needlessly by knowing too much? 
That would work out great if an Imperial 
interrogator Droid ever got a hold of you. 


GM (as Commander Avalon): "The transport 
carries cargo for an Alliance safe-world — 
supplies and the like. It also carries Imperial 
prisoners for transfer to a secure Alliance 
location. Guard them well and arrive safely. 
Good luck, and may the Force be with you." 
The holo-image fades. 


3rd Rebel: Imperial prisoners! This is а 
bigger mission than I imagined. 


5th Rebel: And a more dangerous one. One 


slip-up and we could be leading the Empire 
right to one of our safe-worlds. 

4th Rebel: Back up a second. What's a safe- 
world? 


Ist Rebel: How long did you say you were 
with the Rebellion? A safe-world is a planet 
not under Imperial control where the 
Alliance maintains facilities for the families 
of the Rebel soldiers. 


6th Rebel: On each safe-world, men, women 
and children not directly needed as combat 
personnel remain in hiding. 


2nd Rebel: They stay safe and the front-line 
soldiers dont have to worry about their 
families while they re off fighting the Empire. 


5th Rebel: Okay, let's get ready. We're about 
to come out of hyperspace. 


Ist Rebel: Realspace is so dull compared to 
the shifting colors along the hyperlanes. 


2nd Rebel: Look out! We've emerged in the 
middle of an uncharted asteroid storm! And 
you said realspace was dull ... 


GM: А round object smashes into your ship's 
rear section, then goes spinning away in 
flames. Warning lights flash, but the ship's 
systems remain on line. 


4th Rebel: Those aren't asteroids. They're 
TIE fighters! And there are dozens of them! 


3rd Rebel: A full squadron to be precise, 
and they re being supported by an Imperial 
Star Destroyer. 


6th Rebel: | don't see any sign of Celestial , 
but those TIEs have noticed us. Prepare to 
take evasive action. 


MIEÓOUEGECHONIR—— R 


Red Mist Scene Cards 


Gamemaster's note: When a player's character is overcome by the red mist, hand 
the player a "Red Mist Card." After the player describes the scene to the other 
players, return to episode three for more information. 


Red Mist Card #1 


Describe this scene to the other 
players through your character's 
eyes, then wait for instructions. 


Describe this scene to the other 
players through your character's 
eyes, then шай for instructions. 


You wander within the deep red 
mist, feeling alone and separated. 
Strange sounds echo around you, bouncing through the 
crimson tendrils. You can see dark shapes begin to form 
in the fog. For a moment you think they are your fellow 
Rebels, but then the shapes become more pronounced, 
more definite. They are alien, insectlike shapes that 
seem to change in the swirling fog. Then, like flitting 
shadows, they begin to move, darting through the mist 
toward you. 


The mist ahead parts and you see 

the others from your group. They are 
laughing and joking, full of life and vitality. You hate 
them! Don't they realize the futility of it all? Only death 
awaits you within this desolate place. The image fills 
your mind, and you long for the peace and security of the 
Final Jump. Life has become too stressful, too random. 
It must be destroyed. You reach for your blaster, ready to 
extinguish the curse of life from the others. 


чш» еш» «> — کے ت‎ «ШЫ کے‎ =ш» «м» «шы «к» «м» «қ» өл» е-о «ж» «к چک‎ өс «ж» "me «ш» س‎ «кш» س‎ «же = «шь == == «м» «м» «ш» «м» «ше «ш» «ж» «ж» «ше «ж» «ше «же «м» «м» чш «м» «кә өз» مت‎ «ғ» «һе» «к» «к» =з س‎ = > == — «м» «шь «ж» «м» «ж» «шь «ш» еш» —— ЧАР «ш- —— сш» «к» «ж» «ж» «м» «к» — — — — — = 


Describe this scene to the other 
players through your character's 
eyes, then wait for instructions. 


Describe this scene to the other 
players through your character's 
eyes, then wait for instructions. 


Ahead of you, through the billowing 

clouds of red, lies a pile of strange 
objects. Pushing past the clinging tendrils of fog, you see 
large pods scattered across the floor. You can see a shape 
within each pod, and your curiosity forces you closer. 
Suddenly you are surrounded by hundreds of pods. 
Those nearest you crack open, spilling bodies onto the 
floor. You try not to look, but you know who these bodies 
are — they are your friends. 


Through the swirling tendrils of 

mist you see a tall, black monolith. 
The smooth stone absorbs all light, all heat, all life into 
its shadowy depths. It calls to you, silently beckoning 
you to step forward. You refuse, holding your ground in 
this fog-filled terrain. Then the monolith begins to grow, 
its dark outline coming closer and closer. You turn to 
flee, but the spreading darkness engulfs you, wrapping 
around you like the cold of eternal night. 


Red Mist Card #3 Red Mist Card #6 


Describe this scene to the other Describe this scene to the other 
players through your character's players through your character's 
eyes, then wait for instructions. eyes, then wait for instructions. 


Shadows dart around you, obscured 
by the crimson mist. Dark shapes 
swirl in the thickening fog, silently stalking you. You 
continue through the chamber as sounds start to assault 
you. Something scrapes across the stonelike floor to your 
right, quickly joined by a symphony of scraping sounds. 
The scraping intensifies, getting louder and louder as 
the increasing number of shadows turns the crimson fog 
black. Then, all at once, the sounds stop. 


You move forward, wading through 
the crimson mist to find an exit from 
this chamber. Each step becomes more difficult, 
however. The tendrils of fog cling to you, pulling at your 
limbs and hindering your movements. Like webbing, the 
mist wraps around you. It covers your weapons and 
equipment, binding them in place. Soon the red mist is 
so thick that you cannot move at all, cannot see, cannot 
breathe. Then something begins to drag you down. 


۱ 
| 
1 
1 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
1 
| 
і 
1 
l 
! 
1 
! 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
! 
і 
| 
| 
[ 
1 
і 
! 
| 
і 
1 
l 
 ——Ó—————Ó— ЖА. = ШЕ ВЫ Эй. со E І.Е аы a a шна ки За, Ча Келш Seas 
1 
} 
l 
і 
| 
! 
| 
| 
! 
| 
| 
і 
[ 
| 
І 
| 
| 
[ 
1 
1 
| 
! 
! 
! 
| 
і 
! 
! 
| 
! 


ењ ао «ы» we чш» «мж» чш» «м» «ж» «ж» «м» «ж» «м» «м» «м» «ль еш» «м» еш» ел» еш» «ж» «ж» «ны» «ж» «шы» «ы» «мо «ы» «шы «з» р «м» CD «ШӘ «-- ame aum کے‎ cue Que «к» «м» «м» «м» «ж «м» «м» «оз еш» «ж» «жш» کے‎ Cu» «ж» «қ» cup لے‎ еш» سے‎ «м» «нш» «ж» == ел» «ы» @ «<> «ш» «м» cu «ә «ы» cu «ко «м» «м» «м» ем» «м» «м» «м» «м» «м» «қ» «м» «м» «м» «жы» «ы» «шы» а» «м» «ы» ӘӘ ко «ж» “с: «м» «м» «м» «һо «м» «м» «м» سے سے‎ аш» کے‎ «ж» «ж» «ж» «шо ош» 


GAMEMASTER МАР: е ESO 


CELESTIAL 


ИКТ, 
(KX 
УУУ 


«У 26 6 ё 


б 
0 
.. 


УУГУ У 

ХХХ 
иу 000: 
no^ Y ...” нң: 


haron History and Beliefs 

The Сһагоп 5 home star was caught in 
the influence of a huge black hole. The 
Charon death cult grew from attempts to 
explain what the Charon saw as the futility 
of their existence — the eventual death of 
their entire system. The cult was 
dangerous but small — until the Charon 
developed sublight drive. Given a grand 
purpose, the philosophy of the death cult 
spread through Charon culture like 
radiation from an uncontrolled reactor 
leak. The first world to fall victim was their 
home system. As the vast majority of 
believers had left the world, it was fitting 
that the unbelieving among the chosen 
race be the first to join the Void. For 
millions of years the Charon have brought 
death to otherspace. The following 
document is taken from the holodocs in 
Berascos computer. It gives an overview 
of the beliefs of the death cult. 

"Тһе Void is the way of the universe, the 
fate of the universe, the truth of the 
universe. АП shall go to the Void. Such is 
the natural order of things. 

“The Void consumes all, yet we issued 
from the Void. The Void calls to us to 


е a Ê a ce E > чы. S 


. J LJ 
04 S. 


P CRX 


„аа XXL 


РК ООО ох 
ЖҰХААА, хуу 
/ ы (ун 


return, and return we shall. But why has 
the Void issued us if only to consume us 
directly? Order guides the Void. Such is 
the natural order of things. 

"The Void has chosen us. We, children of 
the Void, exult in this knowledge. For the 
Void is opposed by Life. Ever changing, 
ever growing, Life seeks to triumph over 
the Void. Life refuses to acknowledge the 
primacy of the Void. Such is unnatural. 

"We are humbled by our responsibility. 
For only the Charon are chosen. Among all 
the living, only we understand that Life is 
not natural. We must return Life to the way 
of the Void. Such is the natural order of 
things. 

"Among us shall arise the Final Prophet. 
This Prophet shall lead us to the final 
victory over Life. This done, the Void shall 
be pleased; the Void shall answer the 
Prophet and the way and the order of the 
eternal universe shall be revealed to the 
Prophet. The Prophet shall speak to us. 
Once we have heard, we shall all be free to 
return to the Void, to take our part in the 
Forever. Such is the natural order of 
things." 


PULLOUT SECTION 


20 НАЙ OF CONTESTS 


——— б U | 
ВОТ О ج ج‎ 


GAMEMASTER МАР: 


DESOLATE DESOLATE MAP KEY 


Platform One 

1. The Connecting Ramp 
2. The Great Hall 
3. The Growing Chamber 
4. The Overlook 

5. Cargo Hold A 

6. Mists of Death 


Platform Two 

7. Vehicle Bay 

8. Hangar Decks A 

9. Computer Room 

10. Chamber of Armor 
11. Chamber of Nutrients 
12. The Fuel Pods 

13. Ber asco's Holopark 
14. The Living Hall 


Platform Three 

15. Food Storage Pods 
16. The New Engine A 

17. Hall of Contests 
Platform Three 18. Construct Chamber A 
19. Chamber of Sleep 


Platform Four 

20. The Ship's Brain 

21. The Altar of Death 
22. The Living Computer 
23. The Nest A 

24. Crawltube Up 

25. Crawltube Down 

26. Power Core 


^ Hyperdrive Parts 


yx > 

ү gp 

74 | - 
T! r 

=> 41/77 ` № 
”жй! Во. (eS 

ENTE 1 

1 A 


ғ” лата ы” 


Bane Nothos 
Template Type: Imperial Commander 
Ht: 1.85m Sex: Male 


DEX 20-2 
Blaster 3D+2 Command 5D+2 
Dodge 4D Hide/ Sneak 40 +1 
Heavy Weapons STR 3D 

4DMelee 4D+2 Stamina 3D+2 
KNO 20-1 
Bureaucracy 40+ 1 
Cultures 3D 
Technology 50 +1 
МЕС 30 +1 

Starship Gunnery 5D 
Starship Piloting 4D+1 
Starship Tactics 5D+2 


РЕК 3D+1 


TEC 3D+1 

Comp. Prog./Repair 6D 
Demolition 4D 
Medicine 4D 

Security 4D+2 

Starship Repair 3D+2 


Physical Description: Nothos has a square face lined from 
exposure to stellar radiation. His dark eyes sharply 
contrast his white-blond hair. His motions are abrupt, his 
speech percussive and precise. 

Equipment: Blaster (damage 4D), laser ring (damage 4D+2, 
one charge). 

Background: Bane Nothos saw his career shattered by the 
Shantipole Project failure. Later, as commander of an Outer 
Rim Territories fleet, he improved his tactical ability. His 
capture by the Alliance was due to a flaw in his crew's 
execution of his orders, not his tactics. 

Personality: Nothos is ambitious, headstrong, and enjoys 
taking risks when the reward looks promising. He has no 
patience for underlings who fail to grasp his concepts. 
Quote: “History has proven precision and speed decisive.” 


Celis Mott 


Template Type: Pirate 
Ht: 1.65m Sex: Male 


DEX 3D+2 PER 3D 
Blaster 5D Bargain 5D+ | 
Dodge 4D+2 Command 4D 
Melee 5D+2 Con 4D+2 
Melee Parry 5D+2 Gambling 4D+1 
KNO 2D STR 2D+2 
Bureaucracy 4D Brawling 4D+2 
MEC 3D+2 Stamina 3D+2 
Astrogation 5D TEC 3D 
Starship Piloting 4D+2 Security 4D 
Starship Shields 5D+2 Starship Repair 5D+1 


Physical Description: Celis Mott is used to eating well; it 
shows in his bearded face and around his gut. He trims and 
dyes his eyebrows in the Peluchian style. 

Equipment: blaze-cutlass (damage 4D+1), blaster pistol 
(damage 4D), 2 grenades, 6 medpacs. 

Background: Mott's armada plies the Nanth'ri space route, 
or did until a Rebel fleet stopped him. Mott knows that 
without him, his pirate fleet will disintegrate in a series of 
internal squabbles; he cuts any possible deal to get himself 
back to Nanth ri. 

Personality: Celis Mott is dashing, only not as dashing as 
he believes himself to be. Mott is shrewd, a good 
negotiator, but not courageous. 

Quote: "Please sit down...have some Corellian whiskey ... 1 
am afraid it is time to discuss the nasty business of having 
to push you out an airlock." 


Template Type: Bounty Hunter 
Ht: 1.7m Sex: Female 


DEX 4D PER 3D 

Blaster 5D+1 Con 4D 

Dodge 40+] STR 3D+2 

Force Pike 6D Brawling 4D+2 

KNO 2D+2 TEC 2D 

Cultures 4D+2 Starship Piloting 3D+2 
MEC 2D+2 

Comp. Prog./Repair 3D 


Physical Description: Zardra is a tall, dark-haired human, 
Her appearance is striking, sensual; she prides herself in 
projecting a hint of danger. A flowing cloak and a long force 
pike are her usual accessories. 

Equipment: Force pike (damage 5р +2), blaster pistol 
(damage 4D) thermal detonator, knife, stun cloak (wraps 
around victim, stun damage 5D). 

Background: After a disastrous performance on Tatooine, 
Zardra found herself the target of bounty hunters even as 
she continued to accept missions. She was captured by the 
Alliance when one of her informants decided to play both 
sides of the airlock. 

Personality: Zardra loves violence and personal combat, 
and has relished the chance to reverse roles with pursuing 
bounty hunters. She deeply resents her betrayal and 
capture; the informant had best crawl into a deep crater. 
Quote: "Darling, soon І shall embark on my finest hunt." 
Note: If in your campaign Zardra died in the adventure 
Tatooine Manhunt, substitute another bounty hunter. 


Charon Bioscientists 
Template Type: Charon Warriors 
Ht: 2.1m Sex: Female (Immature) 


DEX 2D PER 4D 3:3 / 

Dodge 5D Hide/ Sneak 6D TNS 4 fa 

Melee Parry 5D Search 5D+2 f 3390 

Brawling Parry 4D STR 2D М. ) M. 

KNO 4D Brawling 3D+1 br 2% - 

Alien Races 5D Climbing / Jumping 6D 

Languages 4D+2 TEC 4D 

Planetary Comp. Ргов./ Repair 5D 
Systems 50+ 1 Construct Design 70 + 1 

Technology 60 +1 Medicine 6D 

MEC 2D 


Physical Description: Charon bioscientists are smaller then 
warriors. Their reactions are less quick, but their bodies 
are more agile. In contrast to the uniform, dull coloration 
of the warriors, most bioscientists have iridescent cilia on 
their forelegs. 

Equipment: Web spinneret (traps victim, STR 4D.), clawed 
arms (brawling damage 4D), medprobe, diagnostic sensor, 
plasma scapel, neuro-replacement chips. 

Background: Bioscientists use their extensive knowledge 
to create motile, thinking biological constructs which lack 
the blasphemous free will and variability of life forms. 
Personality: Bioscientists display a wider range of behavior 
than warriors. Bioscientists are fervent about their work, 
and are bred and taught to think in longer term goals than 
warriors. 

Quote: (drone and rising tone) "sshss'sspspss okss (claw 
click) swi'spss (cilia flutter) sssa' scs." 


PULLOUT SECTION 


Grand Moff Ravik 


Template Type: Imperial Grand Moff 
Ht: 1.9m Sex: Male 


EL-434 


Template Type: Assassin Droid 
Ht: 1.5m Sex: None 


DEX 3D PER 4D 
"m 4D+1 PER ID | Dodge 4D Command 6D+2 
еее Parry 5D+1 Hide/Sneak 6D KNO 4D Con 5D 
Heavy Weapons 7-1 Search 8D Bureaucracy 6D Search 4D+2 
TEC A Planetary Systems 6D«1 Survival 5D 
Technology 4D+2 STR 2D 
MEC 3D TEC 2D 


Physical Description: EL-434 is made from a cerillium 
composite, giving him a dark sheen. His motoball forms a 
base for his crustacean-like upper body. All of EL-434's 
critical systems are well armored, and the Droid is in peak 
condition. 

Equipment: Blaster cannon(damage 6D), concussion 
missile launcher (damage 7D), motoball, electro-photo 
receptor, infrared sensor, com-signal detector, motion 
sensor, chemical sensor, auditory membranes. 
Background: Little is known about EL-434. The Droid has 
been efficient in eliminating all records and witnesses. 
Alliance intelligence guesses he was built in the Junquers 
system, and that EL-434 has been active for many years. 
Personality: Cunning, ruthless and violent programming. 
No discernible personality. 

Quote: (mechanical whisper) "Target acquired." 


Comp. Prog./Repair 4D 
Security 40+ | 


Physical Description: Tall, thin to the point of emaciation, 
Ravik looks 10 standard years older than he is. His 
movements are brittle and slight. 

Equipment: Comlink, pocket computer, blaster pistol. 
Background: Ravik rose quickly through the Imperial 
hierarchy, a man born with an instinct for the true nature of 
the New Order. His heartless rule of Tolonda sector is 
infamous. His sector has been given a brief reprieve with 
Ravik's capture, but the Grand Moff has plans enough to 
grind down the spirit of Tolonda when he returns. 
Personality: Brutal and delighting in his brutality, Ravik 
shows no emotion other than anger or hatred, and shows 
those only rarely. Calculating and assured of his 
superiority, Ravik is slowly eroding the command of Bane 
Nothos in order to take charge. 

Quote: "The tragedy of the weak is their lack of 
apprehension of their value as a resource for the strong." 


Charon Warriors 


Template Type: Charon Warriors Вегаѕсо ұла 
Ht: 2.3m Sex: Male (Immature) Template Type: Charon Leader A 

Ht: 3.2m Sex: Male (Mature) | 
DEX 4D PER 4D | 
Dodge 5D Hide/ Sneak 6D DEX 4D PER 4D 4 
KNO 2D Search 4D+2 (reduced to 3D) Bargain 4D+2 254 
Survival 3D STR 4D Dodge 4D Command 6D m. 
MEC 2D Brawling 4D+ 1 KNO 4D Search 4D+2 

Climbing/ Jumping 5D Alien Races SD STR 4D (+2D armor) 
TEC 2D Languages 5D Brawling 5D 

Survival 4D+2 Climbing/ Jumping 4D+1 
Physical Description: Charon warriors are spiderlike MEC 2D Stamina 5D+1 
beings with eight appendages that can be used as both TEC 2D 
arms and legs. Usually they stand upright, towering over all Computer Prog./Repair 5D 
but the tallest opponents. Dark, shadowy masters of | - | 
stealth, Charon are not often seen unless they want to be. Physical Description: A mature Charon male, his natural 
Equipment: Web spinneret (traps victim, STR 30+1), body armor has been augmented by his bioscientists into a 
plasma blaster (damage 4D), clawed arms (brawling formidable defense. 
damage 5D); poison. Targets taking non-stun damage from Equipment: None. All needs are taken care of by warriors, 
poisoned claw make a Moderate stamina roll. Failed roll bioscientists, or by accessing the computer. 
means target takes an additional wound. Charon must Background: Berasco led the campaign to extinguish the 
spend one round secreting poison. life on the last few living worlds in otherspace, claiming the 
Background: Hailing from a planet which orbited a black title of Final Prophet. Now he must renew the crusade to 
hole, the Charon adopted a religion which worshipped the destroy the galaxy of realspace. | 
Void, and through the Void, death. Tens of thousands of Personality: Ber'asco believes that his every move IS 
Prophets have led them on a crusade destroying millions of guided by the Void. He sees the discovery of life in another 
worlds. Ber'asco is their Final Prophet. dimension as proof his job in otherspace is finished. He 
Personality: They believe unfettered life is a blasphemy, also believes hyperdrive technology to be another sign. For 
and plan to send all life, including themselves, to the Void. with it worlds shall fall to the Void far faster than before. 
They are hunters, and all living things are their prey. Quote: "The disease is strong; its strains resist fiercely. But 


Quote: (rasp of claws) "ss'hss'okss's" (descending bi-tone). the Void shall prevail.” 


alter the stark contrast between this area 
and the overgrown one you just left. But 
the stony floor is not perfect. A large, 
gaping hole fills the middle of the chamber 
floor, and great cracks run from it to create 
canyons that fall deeper into the craft. 
Glowing light spills from the cracks, 
painting the chamber in arterial red. 


The lower cavity can be seen if the PCs get 
close enough to either a crack or the large 
hole. Looking into these pits reveals an area 
filled with clouds of blood-red mist. A 


tun Damage 
When blasters are set on stun, or 


when characters are attacked by 
weapons designated as "stun only," these 
rules are used. Note that these rules 
replace "Setting Blasters on Stun” on 
page 48 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying 
Game. Also note that weapons set on 
stun retain their normal damage codes, 
but use the table below for the effect of 
the damage. 


Stun Damage Summary 


DR«SR No Effect 
DR» SR 1D Stun 
DR>2xSR 2D Stun 
DR>3xSR Unconscious 


All die codes (except Strength for 
purposes of resisting damage) are 
reduced by ID for each stun. Stuns are 
cumulative within a round. For example, 
a character hit twice for a "20 stun’ 
result each time would lose 4D for all 
actions in that round and the next round. 

If the number of stuns taken in one 
round equals or exceeds the character's 
Dexterity, that character is immobile. 
Immobile characters are not 
unconscious, but they can take no DEX 
skill actions while immobile. If they have 
dice remaining in any other attributes, 
they can take actions which do not 
require movement. For example, if a 
Scout character received 3D of stun in a 
round he would be immobilized, but he 
could still use his Knowledge skills (at a 
3D reduction). 

If the number of stuns ever exceeds a 
characters stamina, the character is 
knocked unconscious. 


membrane separates the lower area from the 
rest of the cavity. Periodically, thick clouds 
of red bubble up through the barrier to send 
wisps of death mist into the upper area. 
Every so often the swirling mists part to 
show the pulsing, interconnected roots of 
the power core. 


Event Two: The Mad Pirate 

Celis Mott, scourge of the Nanth'ri space 

route, has gone mad. The first Charon attack 
drove him into a swirl of red mist which 
made him insane. He vacillates between the 
cunning cutthroat he is and the dashing 
pirate he believes himself to be. 
Mott has claimed the overlook as his 
territory, along with three equally-mad 
members of Celestial’s crew now serving as 
loyal henchmen. When the PCs enter this 
area, Mott sees them alternately as loyal 
crewmen to be commanded with brag- 
gadocio and Rebels to be looted and then 
sold to the Imperials. 

Mott starts this meeting in "shrewd 
cutthroat mode," ambushing the Rebels with 
hopes of plunder. The pirate and his three 
assistants attack the PCs from behind jagged 
rocks, firing warning shots and calling for 
them to throw down their weapons and 
supplies. The rocks provide medium cover 
(+2) for Mott and his men. If the Rebels 
comply with his orders, he sends the 
crewmen out to collect their belongings. But 
before the crewmen reach the PCs, Mott 
switches to "dashing pirate mode." 

In "dashing pirate mode," Mott is amiable 
and apologetic for not having recognized the 
Rebels sooner — they are obviously loyal 
pirates. Mott tries to calm the Rebels, 
reacting with jocular patience to even 
blaster fire from the PCs (after all, he 
accidentally opened fire on the PCs first, and 
no true pirate would take that sort of thing 


edpacs 


Medpacs may be used more than 
once a day. Each medpac use beyond the 
first has less chance of being effective, 
due to negative synergy of the drugs and 


diagnostics programmed with the 
assumption that only one medpac is being 
used. Each medpac beyond the first used 
in a day increases the difficulty number of 
the healing by 3. 


quietly). Тһе crewmen's moods follow that 
of Celis Mott. 

During this event Celis Mott switches 
between "shrewd cutthroat mode" and 
"dashing pirate mode" as many times as you 
can get away with. 

Celis Mott has not been exposed to 
enough mist to kill him, but he will not be 
free of its effects in time to matter for this 
encounter. If the Rebels knock Mott 
unconscious, he awakens back in his normal 
frame of mind and agrees to help them until 
such time as they no longer serve his 
purposes. If they kill him in combat and 
check his body, a Moderate medicine roll 
determines that Mott had nerve tissue 
damage, but not as extensive as that 
suffered by Captain Gryphon. 


Celestial Crewmen: DEX 2D-1, blaster Зр, 
dodge 2D+2. АП other attributes and skills 
2D. Blaster damage 4D. 


Cargo Hold 

This chamber serves as a cargo hold for 
the Charon ship. Remnants of equipment 
from the many vessels stranded in 
otherspace have been stored here for use by 
Desolate's crew. Read the following out loud 
when the Rebels enter this area. 


Within this odd-shaped chamber, 
dividing columns rise to a ceiling some 20 
meters overhead. The columns are long 
and thin, made from the rocky material 
used throughout the ship. But stuck into 
the column are thousands of hexagonal 


ut- Away to Ber asco 


After the scene with Mott, read 
aloud: 


INTERIOR: THE ALIEN CRAFT. Strands of 
webbing reluctantly part as the camera 
gains speed. Soon it passes openings 
quickly, giving you brief glimpses of 
shadowy movement. Weird light begins to 
spring on off-camera, just out of sight, 
causing the barely-seen shadows to move 
faster. 

A passage opens and the camera turns, 
traveling up through a vertical tube, up to a 
higher level of the ship. Then, abruptly, the 
camera stops. 

The scene is dark, yet the light of 
otherspace filters in from somewhere 
above. Undefined shapes loom in the 
blackness, barely visible in the dim light. 
The scene gets brighter, the shapes become 
clearer, more distinct. But before you can 
focus on any particular thing, a shadow 
snaps into the frame and a multitude of 
alien eyes look directly at you. 

"The illness has returned, my children," 
whispers a frightening voice. "Let us cure 
ite: 

Wipe to ... 

INTERIOR: THE ALIEN CRAFT. Where a 
group of Rebel heroes continues to 
explore ... 


pods, jutting out at various angles to form 
canopies above the narrow spaces between 
the column rows. 


As the Charon are not familiar with much 
of the technology used by the Empire and 
the Alliance, many useful items can be found 
in this chamber. If the Rebels search around 
and open a few of the pods, they discover 
common items carried on spaceships. One 
pod contains cartons of supplies for a 
mining colony. Another is filled with spare 
Droid parts. Yet another has survival tents 
shoved into it. 

If the Rebels search more pods, allow them 
to find items that could prove useful but do 
not provide them with an undue advantage. 
So, they may find syntherope, glow rods, 
power shovels and protective vests, but not 
weapons, explosives or complete hyper- 
drives. 


а ie ТРИАС ТУ ЖҰҚ EMEN NN 


However, if the PCs make а Moderate 
search roll, they find one important piece 
they need to repair their hyperdrive unit. 
They find a brand new hypercoil, one of five 
components that make up a hyperdrive 
motivator. 


Mists of Death 

When the PCs reach this area, they meet a 
more resistive membrane. They must make 
Easy Strength rolls to pass through this 
doorway, or slice open the transparent 
covering with lightsaber, vibroblade, or knife 
(this membrane has a Strength of 2D). 
Blasters can only poke holes in the 
membrane, and these repair themselves 
immediately. 

Once the Rebels are 
membrane, read: 


through the 


Wisps of red mist hang low in this 
chamber, obscuring the floor and making it 
difficult to judge distance and size. Clouds 
of the crimson fog float freely, hiding and 
revealing other areas as they drift by. In 
the distance you occasionally catch a 
glimpse of a tube-like column rising into 
the ceiling, but the drifting fog encloses it 
before you can determine more details. 


While the mist obscures vision, the room 
is flat and unadorned. А crawltube stands 
across the chamber, leading up to the 
second level. 

The red mist is the Charon "death mist." 
It is their primary tool in their mission to 
eradicate life from the universe. In small 
doses it causes pain, madness, and 
hallucinations as it first attacks the nerve 
cells in the brain. Larger doses lead to death. 


Event Three: The Death Mist Cards 

Within the death mist, the Rebels must 
fight off the affects of minimal exposure to 
the gas. Even breath masks offer little 
protection, as the mist clings to exposed 
flesh and enters a person's system through 
pores. Only a sealed vac suit provides 
complete protection, and a PC wearing one 
crosses the chamber with no problem. 
Others must make stamina rolls to fight off 
the poison mist. 

In the mist, even Rebels close to each 
other feel separated and alone as visibility 
constantly shifts and worsens. Each Rebel 
must make three stamina rolls as he or she 
crosses the room to determine if the death 
mist has affected him or her. The first is an 
Easy check, the second is a Moderate 


ы у кз се усу ысу эн че up AEN Et EOM / 


difficulty check, and the third and final 
stamina roll is a Difficult check. If any roll is 
less than the needed number, the mist's 
effects manifest in frightening hallucinations. 

Locate the "Red Mist Cards” in the pullout 
section. When a player character fails a 
stamina roll, hand the player a "Red Mist 
Card." He or she must read the card. Leave 
that player in suspense until all other PCs 
have reached the crawltube or read a card. 
After reading a "Red Mist Card," the PCs find 
themselves at the crawltube. 

After all PCs have made it to the crawltube 
go on to "Тһе Way Up." 


D eath Mist Effect Chart 


#of Effects 
Three 


Failed Roll 
Easy 
Moderate Two 
Difficult One 


Each effect temporarily lowers an 
attribute by ID. Have each PC roll a six- 
sided die to determine which attribute is 
lowered by 1D for the duration of the next 
episode. No attribute may be lowered by 
more than 1D; roll again if the same 
attribute is affected. 


Die Roll Lower This 
Attribute by 1D 

Dexterity 
Knowledge 
Mechanical 
Perception 
Strength 
Technical 


The Way Up 
The Rebels have successfully crossed the 
mists of death. Read: 


The frightening images fade as clouds of 
mist part to reveal a column that rises into 
the ceiling high above. There is an opening 
in the column which leads into a hollow 
tube. 


This is a crawltube. The hollow tube leads 
up to the second level of the ship. The 
handholds lining the tube walls are too wide 
for humans to use comfortably, and are thin 
and deep. The climb to episode four is 
clumsy. 


А 
A 


pisode Four 


Heart of Darkness 


Summary 

Desolate's second level is more challenging 
for the Rebels, whose abilities are reduced 
due to the death mist. They also learn more 
about the alien ship and its crew, and meet 
Bane Nothos. 


Platform Two Encounters 
and Events 


Vehicle Bay 

The crawltube leads up to a cavernous, 
hilly area — hills which are actually huge, 
translucent pods. Dark shapes can be seen 
within them. One pod is split open, but 
nothing remains within the hollow shell. 

An Easy search roll allows a РС to 
discover a small, round protrusion on each 
pod. A slit runs across the protrusion, 
forming a pocket. If anyone reaches into 
these pockets, they can feel three knoby 
growths. Moderate Technical rolls let the 
PCs manipulate the knobs to open the pod. 
Read: 


The pod splits open, each side falling 
away with a wet, sticky sound. Within the 
moist interior you see an alien construct of 
some sort. It looks more grown than built, 
as though its genetic material was 
manipulated to form unnatural shapes for 
some unknown purpose. 


A Moderate technology roll lets a PC 
determine that these constructs are ships. 
The technology leans more toward the 
biosciences than engineering. The ships 
appear to hold crews of two, like star- 
fighters, but do not appear to use anything 
remotely equivalent to  hyperdrive 
technology. 

The PCs can figure out how to operate the 
Charon ships only on Very Difficult 
Mechanical rolls or better. None of these 
ships have been used in a long time. 

Three portals lead out of the vehicle bay. 


One small opening exits toward the 
computer room, while two large openings 
exit into the hangar decks. 


Hangar Decks 

Beyond the vehicle pods, through two 
large openings covered by more of the 
membranous material, are the domed 
hangar decks. These flat, circular platforms 
lie beneath rocky domes that can be opened 
to provide access to otherspace. Several 
alien ships rest upon one of the decks. One 
is the same as the ships stored in the 
vehicle pods, and was recently within the 
pod the PCs found split open. 

If the Rebels examine the ship they can tell 
the craft was used not too long ago. The 
engine area, which resembles the power 
core within Desolate, is still warm. Web 
strands cling to the interior of the vessel, 
and stored within the webs is a power 
coupler whose markings identify it as 
having come from Celestial's engines. This is 
another necessary piece for rebuilding the 
Rebels' hyperdrive motivator. 


Computer Room 

The computer room is two connecting 
chambers. Within the smaller, circular room 
are pulsing fibrous coils that surround a 
central pillar. The pillar is covered with 
monitors and screens in the shape of 
insectoid eyes. Most of these eyes remain 
dead and lifeless, covered by a thin layer of 
membranous material. Others glow with 
alien writing that flashes across their convex 
surfaces. Some show scenes outside the 
ship, monitoring the derelict vessels. 

The connecting room contains thick, 
translucent tubes that stretch from floor to 
ceiling. Dull-colored liquids bubble through 
these tubes, feeding the once-living brain 
cells that operate the computers. The Rebels 
cannot understand the language which plays 
across the strange screens, nor can they 


25 БРЕ Г ee ee GU CENE DEC WI NUS ee IS 


figure out a way to access these alien 
computers. 


Chamber of Armor 

Set off from the vehicle bay is a room 
containing examples of Charon bioscience at 
its best — Charon battle armor. Made from 
the same organic stone used throughout 
Desolate, battle armor is powerful and 
deadly. 


Event Four: Charon Attack 

As the PCs enter the chamber of armor 
describe the large, alien forms. Made of the 
organic rock, the suits appear to be alive 
even though they arent moving. The dark 
interior heightens the tension of the scene. 
Then, one of the suits moves. Read: 


The dark forms tower above you, giant 
figures that look as though they might 
move at any second. The stillness and quiet 
hangs ominously as you enter the chamber. 
Somewhere off to your right you hear a 
small, scraping sound. One of the large 
shapes turns, and an alien scream shatters 
the quiet as the shape moves toward you. 


А Charon warrior has entered a suit of 
battle armor and has decided to eliminate 


D arkness on the Battlefield 
Darkness and other battlefield 
conditions can obscure targets, making 
combat more difficult. Firing at a fully 
obscured target adds +10 to the difficulty 
number; darkness in a cave would fully 
obscure a target. The darkness inside 
Desolate is partial, adding +5 to the 
difficulty number to hit. If the target has 
been spotted (if the attacker has seen the 
defender fire a blaster, for example) the 
environment acts as medium cover, «2 to 
the difficulty number. 
Spotting an obscured character requires 
a Perception check, which counts as an 
action. If the obscured character is silent 
and did not move last round the check is 
Difficult; if the character made noise or 
moved last round the check is Moderate; 
and if the character fired a blaster last 
round the check is Easy. 
The Charon are used to the gloom 
inside Desolate — their difficulty number 
to hit does not change. 


ae ae eC а ee АЕ re ee 


these dreadful living creatures. Within the 
suit, the warrior feels supremely confident 
and may make tactical mistakes while 
battling the PCs. Once the suit is 
incapacitated, the Charon flees into the 
darkness, giving the Rebels only a glimpse of 
their enemies. 


Charon Battle Armor: DEX 4D+1, dodge 
4D+2, plasma cannon 4D+2; STR 5D, brawling 
5D+2, climbing/jumping 5D+1, lifting 6D. 
Armor attacks: The armor can make no more 
than two attacks in a combat round. Plasma 
cannon (damage 4D+1), armor claws 
(damage 6D). Charon biosensing technology 
allows the battle armor to automatically 
acquire targets which are obscured by the 
environment, and to make a free 6D 
search roll against any hiding or sneaking 
character. 


There are six suits of armor, each designed 
to fit and be controlled by the Charon. A 
Rebel can operate a suit if he makes a 
Difficult technology roll. As the suits are not 
built for non-Charon bodies, +2 is added to 
all difficulty numbers when using the suit to 
perform an action. While in a suit a Rebel is 
protected from Charon poison and the death 
mist until the suit takes damage to in- 
capacitate it. 


Chamber of Nutrients 

Even though Desolate is not alive in the 
normal sense, it maintains organic systems. 
For this reason, parts of the ship need 
nutrients for power and material conversion. 
This large chamber is the main nutrient 
processing facility aboard the ship. When 
the Rebels enter this area, read: 


Another membrane gives way to a large 
chamber that appears to be a storage tank 
of some sort. Completely sealed except for 
the membranous openings on each end of 
the tank, a thick green paste covers the 
bottom of this chamber. Translucent tubes 
run everywhere, distributing the paste to 
other parts of the ship as well as dumping 
more into the room. Large yellow floating 
globs drift lazily around the chamber. 


The Rebels must cross this chamber to 
proceed further into Desolate. The paste 
rises almost a meter high, and the PCs must 
wade through it to reach the exit. Currents 
created by the distribution tubes make 
footing treacherous. Four Easy Dexterity rolls 
are needed to cross without incident. A 


failed roll means that a PC slips. Slipping is 
not dangerous, but falling in the gooey paste 
is annoying. The danger comes after the first 
round of movement in event five. 


Event Five: Waste Conversion 

After the Rebels have made one Dexterity 
check to move through the chamber of 
nutrients, read: 


The warm paste pulls at you as you wade 
across the chamber. You notice the floating 
globs again, because a few of them have 
drifted closer. Long tendrils unravel from 
the bottom of the globs, ending in spiky 
balls that sway menacingly. 


These globs function as waste removal 
units. They attach their tendrils to foreign 
matter and drag it up into their hollow 
bodies where acids convert it into usable 
paste. As Rebels are not normally within the 
nutrient chamber, the globs treat them as 
foreign matter. No more than one glob 
attacks a PC at one time. Once the PCs 
cross the chamber, the globs stop attacking. 
There are over 40 globs. 


Floating Globs: DEX 3D, PER 2D, STR 3D. 
Four tendril-maces damage 4D. Acid sac 
6D+1 damage. A floating glob gets an attack 
with each tendril-mace at the full 3D 
Dexterity; the multi-action penalty is not 
applied. If all four tendrils hit, that PC is 
entangled and dragged toward the glob's 
acid sac. 


The Fuel Pods 

Long, thin pods fill this chamber that 
surrounds part of the power core. Thin 
fibers stretch from the core to the walls of 
the room, running directly above the pods. 
The pods glow with energy and every few 
moments one explodes, sending streams of 
power along the fibers into the core. 

Rebels in this area must make Moderate 
Dexterity rolls to avoid being caught in an 
explosion. Those that fail must roll against 
5D+1 concussion (stun) damage. These pods 
can be removed for use as bombs, but as 
they explode at random intervals this may 
not work very well. 


Ber'asco's Holopark 

This area is made up of five flat platforms 
surrounding a circular display. The display is 
a holographic representation of an unknown 
galaxy, a galaxy with an absence of stars at 
the very center. PCs making an Easy 
planetary systems roll explain that the void at 
the center is a black hole. The display is set 
at a speed about one billion times faster 
than real time. 

This is just the centerpiece of this display. 
As the PCs wander from platform to platform 
the following holoimages snap on. 

The first shows a civilization inhabited by 
a spiderlike race. The planet orbits a star 
that is slowly being pulled apart by a black 
hole. As the civilization grows beneath this 
frightening spectacle, it turns to embrace 
the black hole as a powerful god that is 
eating its source of life. 

The second platform shows the rise of a 
powerful cult upon this dying world. Instead 
of working to save the star and its planets, 
the cult calls for worship of everything the 
void represents — an end to existence, 
nothingness, death. 

The third platform details the cult's leader, 
an armored spider-being who oversees the 
construction of an armada of crude 
spacecraft. Within the spacecraft are tanks 
of red mist. With these items, the cult leader 
makes his first sacrifice to his cruel god — 
he releases the mist over the planet and the 
people die in madness and pain. 

The fourth platform shows the deaths of 
numerous other worlds, each flipping by at 
amazing speed. The spider beings 
incorporate the technology of each dead 
world into their growing armada. Then the 
images freeze upon a fleet of vessels much 


I ел узы ы ыы ЗВЕРЬ E NEC NU ROT ULM 


like Desolate, only these ships are vibrantly 
alive instead of dead and shadowy. The 
view zooms to a single craft, with spider- 
beings crawling upon its surface, using weird 
instruments to inject material into the ship. 
Then the scene speeds up again, and as the 
Rebels watch, the ship decays and 
deteriorates before their eyes. Its change to 
Desolate complete, the ship and the scene 
blink out. 

The final platform shows Desolate 
crossing countless galaxies, leaving nothing 
but darkness behind it. The holoimages 
fade, leaving only the void display to 
continue its destruction of the universe. 


The Living Hall 

The Charon use this large hall as a 
common room. Webbing stretches every- 
where, forming a canopy overhead where 
the Charon can hide and rest. Event six takes 
place when the Rebels enter this area. 


Event Six: Bane Nothos Appears 

Grand Moff Ravik is a master of 
manipulation. Since most of the group from 
Celestial was either captured or killed, it fell 
to Ravik and Bane Nothos to vie for 
command of those remaining. The bounty 
hunters wanted nothing to do with the 
military men and went off on their own. 
Ravik slowly eroded Nothos' command until 
the Grand Moff was in control of the 
remaining crew; Bane Nothos soon fell in 
line. As Ravik made overtures to the 
Charon, he instructed Nothos to remain 
behind to prevent any interference, although 
the trouble he expected was from the 
bounty hunters rather than the Rebels. 

Nothos sees the PCs as a tactical problem 
to be solved. If he recognizes these Rebels 
from the Strike Force: Shantipole adventure 
he will be looking for a chance to avenge his 
defeat. When the Rebels enter the living hall, 
read: 


Webbing presses down oppressively from 
above, and you are certain that something 
up there is watching you. Scuttling sounds 
overhead confirm your fears, but before 
you can act an authoritative voice calls out. 
"Members of the Galactic Empire. Throw 
down your weapons in the name of Bane 
Nothos!" 


Whether the Rebels comply or not, four 
Charon warriors drop from above. They 


ШЕГРТ ey Pe алты EO a E CI MENS | 


wield no weapons but their own deadly 
claws. From the shadows 20 meters away 
Nothos tries to convince the Rebels to 
surrender. He will stress the need for "new 
soldiers in this new era," but will refuse to 
elaborate except in cryptic ways. 

If the Rebels do not agree to join him, 
Nothos orders the Charon to destroy them. 
The four warriors battle to the death. 
Nothos may not combine with the Charon as 
he does not understand their tactics or their 
language well enough to coordinate his 
efforts with theirs; what little he knows of 
the aliens is what Ravik taught him in a very 
hectic time. During the contest, Nothos pulls 
a thermal detonator from his belt and moves 
forward. If any PC blasts him before he can 
toss it, the detonator smashes into the floor 
near Nothos's feet and explodes, sending 
chunks of the floor cascading down to the 
lower level. The Imperial falls through the 
hole along with debris and webbing, 
disappearing from sight. 


The Crawltube 
In the corridor between the living hall and 
the fuel pods is a crawltube up. 


uidelines for Combined Actions 


Use common sense when deter- 
mining whether an action can be 
combined. Most actions can be combined. 
Things that cannot be combined include 
all reaction skills, movement rolls vs. 
terrain, beast riding, operation of a single 
vehicle (co-pilots don't combine, they 
perform other actions), climbing/jumping 
(although circumstances might make it 
possible to combine a climb), stamina, 
swimming (sometimes), and Force skills. 

To figure out how many people сап 
combine to do a single action, use the skill 
of the lead character. For example, if they 
are searching and the lead character has 
4D, no more than three additional people 
may combine with the leader. In the case 
of combat use the command skill to 
determine the maximum number of 
combined fires rather than the blaster 
skill itself. Note that stormtroopers are 
not under this restriction — this is one of 
their advantages. 


pisode Five 


The Great Contest 


Summary 

Three events spur on this episode. First, 
the Rebels discover what befell the crews of 
the many derelict ships that orbit Desolate. 
Then they battle undead constructs in a 
contest staged by the Charon bioscientists. 
Finally, the Rebels witness the great 
awakening as the Charon warriors answer 
their prophet's call. 


Platform Three Encounters 
and Events 

Gamemaster's note: The effects of the 
death mist wear off once the Rebels reach 
this level. Their attributes and skills return 
to normal, not including any penalties for 
damage they may have sustained. 


Food Storage Pods 

The crawltube from level two deposits the 
Rebels inside a cool, moist area. Like the 
cargo hold on level one, this room has pods 
connected to dividing walls, forming stacks 
of stored items. But what is being stored 
here is not spare machinery, but the crews 
from all the wrecked ships. Read: 


Thousands of pods are stacked high in 
this chamber, attached to tall dividing 
walls. The air is cool in here, and you can 
see your breath as you walk around. 
Within the pods you see familiar shapes, 
but you cannot quite identify them through 
the translucent shells. 


If the pods are opened, the PCs find the 
crews from the wrecked ships. Humans, 
Wookiees, Mon Calamarians, and even 
unidentifiable races are stacked beside each 
other in this chamber. An Easy medicine roll 
allows a PC to examine one of the bodies. 
While the person isn't technically dead, 
enough toxin has been administered to 
destroy much nerve tissue in the brain. 

As the Rebels watch, long tendrils drop 
from the ceiling and attach to one of the 


pods. They rip the pod free from the 
dividing wall and carry it toward the power 
core. Just as the pod reaches the core, the 
core opens to accept the pod — occupant 
and all. 

The PCs cannot revive any of these people. 
If they continue to search, they find 10 
crewmen from Celestial. 


The New Engine 

Beside the power column is a room where 
a Charon experiment is underway. Here, the 
bioscientists are working to combine the 
mechanical technology of the derelict ships 
with the organic technology of Desolate. 
Read: 


An unsettling conglomeration of metal 
and organic material has been constructed 
in this chamber. Recognizable ship parts 
have been combined with the alien organic 
technology to create a hybrid of the two. 
The entire works connects to the power 
core, forming an instrument of unknown 
design and purpose. 


A Moderate technology roll lets a Rebel 
recognize this as an alien modification of a 
hyperdrive engine. It is near completion and 
should soon be in working order. 

If the Rebels search the chamber, they find 
a usable 4-axial stabilizer within the hybrid 
mess. This is another of the pieces they 
need to rebuild the hyperdrive motivator in 
The Long Shot. 


Hall of Contests 

A membrane-covered portal leads into this 
strange room. There is no floor, just small 
oddly-shaped platforms that hang 
suspended across the hall. Each platform 
connects to another by a short, fragile- 
looking web bridge. Here the Charon 
bioscientists conduct their favorite 
experiment. They pit living specimens 
against their constructs to learn how to 
improve their own creations. 


72 сузе ee Pe a ғынан GC qo NE er I Sr а 


Event Seven: The Great Contest 

Find the map of "The Hall of Contests" in 
the pullout section. Also find the counter 
strip provided with this adventure and 
carefully cut apart the counters. Place the 
six counters labeled "PCI" through "PC6" 
outside the entry portal. Place the six 
construct counters, labeled "1" through "6", 
on the starting spaces marked on the map. 
Place EL-434 under a webbing marker on the 
square with the web symbol. The other 
counters are placed to one side for the 
moment. 

This contest combines the roleplaying 
combat system with a visual setting. If you 
have any of The Star Wars Miniatures Sets, 
they can be used with this scenario as well. 

The Rebels must cross the platforms to 
reach the exit portal. The Charon constructs 
stand in their way. These constructs are 
converted creatures whose life force has 
been subdued to create zombies for the 
Charon to command. Like robots or Droids, 
the constructs unerringly obey the orders of 
their masters. But unlike Droids, there is no 
personality or life-spark present. 

Each square on the map represents two 
meters. Movement on the shaky, woven 
surface requires a movement roll, either a 
Dexterity roll or a climbing/jumping roll; the 
choice is up to the moving character. 
Walking moves a character two squares and 
requires a Very Easy movement roll. Running 
moves a character five squares and requires 
an Easy movement roll. The web bridges 
which connect the platform are difficult to 
cross — add the number printed beside 
each web bridge to the movement difficulty 
whenever a chracter moves across any 
portion of the bridge. Every square (or 
portion) jumped adds +3 to the movement 
difficulty. A failed movement roll results in 
the Rebel taking 1D of stun (from tripping 
and falling), stumbling at the end of the 
declared movement. 

The Hall of Contests is as gloomy as the 
rest of Desolate. Remember the darkness 
modifiers when the Rebels are fighting in 
here — the Charon constructs are not 
affected by the darkness. 


The Constructs 


СІ (The Weaver): DEX 3D+1, dodge 4D+1; 
КМО: 2D, MEC 1D; PER 2D+2, STR: 2D+1, TEC 
ID. The bioscientists constructed the 
weaver with a variation of the Charon web- 


Алақаны ға ы ЕН N - 


spinning ability (Web-spinning 5D, strength 
50/30+1; see below). The weaver may use 
the web in one of three ways each round: 


1. Obstruction. The weaver spins a well- 
anchored web with solidly constructed 
strands within a square, blocking passage to 
any character who must pass through the 
square. The web has a Strength of 5D for the 
purposes of resisting damage, and provides 
light cover («1 difficulty) to any character 
hiding behind it. The web must take damage 
equivalent to incapacitation or mortal 
wound before the web can be passed. 


2. Entanglement. А melee attack which may 
be made at range. The base difficulty to 
entangle is 5, plus 2 for every square 
between the weaver and the target; thus the 
weaver needs a 5 to entangle an adjacent 
character. The attack may be parried by a 
melee parry. Once entangled, a character 
can do nothing until he or she has torn, 
blasted or otherwise damaged the web 
sufficently to pull free. When the web has 
taken incapacitating damage or greater the 
character is free. An entangling web only 
has 3D+1 Strength — the strands do not have 
the same structural integrity when thrown at 
range and not spun in a pattern. 


3. Shield. The web may be used as a 
reaction skill much like shielding — the web 
roll is added to the difficulty number to hit 
for a "web total." If the to hit roll exceeds 
the web total, the attack hits the weaver 
directly. If the attack hits but does not 
exceed the web total, the web Strength of 
30+1 is added to the weaver's Strength of 
2D+1 for a total damage resistance of 5D+2. 
The web may be used to shield from all 
attacks on the weaver in a single round. The 
shielding is only usable by the weaver. 


C2, 3 (Shootcrawlers): DEX 3D+1, blaster 
4D+1; KNO 2D; MEC 2D; PER 3D, hide/sneak 
5D, search 5D; STR 3D; TEC ІР. 
Shootcrawlers have a blaster weapon built 
into their right forward appendage. The 
weapon does 4D of damage, but has the 
range of a blaster carbine. 


СА, 5 (Jumpers): DEX 2D+2; KNO 1D+2; MEC 
10; РЕК 3D, Search 6D«1; STR 4D+2, 
climbing/jumping 8D; TEC 1D. Jumpers were 
designed to collect “diseased” (living) 
specimens, doing as little damage as 
possible so the bioscientists could study the 
life processes of the captured beings. They 


————————— ا‎ 
————————— HÀ A 


are programmed to do only stun damage. 
The constructs make brawling attacks, 
including jump-attacks. Jump-attacks may 
be made at range; the base difficulty is 5, 
plus 2 for each square jumped, up to a 
maximum of 15 squares (30 meters). 
Damage is brawling damage (40+2). 
Jumpers may choose to use jumping as their 
normal mode of movement, at a difficulty of 
2 per square jumped. 


C6 (The Gatebeast): DEX 4D+1; KNO 3D; 
MEC 1D; PER 3D; STR 3D; TEC ID. Gate 
power 5D. The gatebeast is constructed 
from a lifeform the Charon extinguished 
centuries ago. The gate power is not fully 
understood by the Charon, who 
programmed the construct to use it in very 
limited ways. When the gatebeast targets a 
character, place the target marker 
underneath the character's piece. Тһе 
difficulty to hit is Easy unless the character 
dodges — but dodging the gate power is 
unusual. A characters Knowledge ог 
control skill is used to dodge the gate power. 
It is not necessary to run to do a "full mental 
dodge"; in other respects this mental dodge 
works the same as a physical dodge. 


Knowledge is used to resist the effects of 
the gate power: 
DR<KR: No effect. 
DR> KR: The target is gated back to the 
target marker; if the target has not moved 
there is no effect (other than a discomfiting 
tingle in the target's central nervous 
system). 
"К> 2xKR: The target is reflected to a point 
opposite his final point, as compared to the 
target point. For example, a character who 
has run two spaces down and three right of 
the target point would be reflected two 
spaces up and three to the left of the target 
point. If the target ends up off a platform, he 
falls. If the target wasn't moving, the energy 
surges through him causing 1D stun damage. 
DR 3xKR: The target is gated to any square 
of the gatebeast's choice. It chooses а 
square not on any platform. 


Charon Bioscientists 

Charon bioscientists are observing the 
contest from webs in total darkness 30 
meters above the hall. They follow the 
progress of the battle eagerly, but quietly. If 
the Rebels lose, they summon warriors to 
bind the victims and take them to the 
construct chambers for further study. 


F) alling Inside Desolate 

The interior of Desolate has been 
altered to suit the Charon. Consequently, 
webbing is everywhere, as rigging, 
support and crawlspace. When a char- 
acter falls from a platform on any level 
there is a good chance he will snare (or be 
snared) by some of this webbing before 
he has a fatal collision. A character gets 
three Dexterity checks; the first is 
Moderate, the second two are Easy. If he 
succeeds at any of them he has 
maneuvered himself into some webbing. 
If the character succeeds the first time, he 
can climb back up to a platform in five 
rounds. If he succeeds on the second, it 
takes 10 rounds, and climbing back up 
takes 20 rounds if the character caught 
himself on the final try. If a character falls 
in the Hall of Contests and catches 
himself, he may resurface on any square 
of any platform within the hall. 


The bioscientists retreat if they are fired 
on by more than one character (including 
EL-434), if two Rebels reach the exit portal, 
or if all the constructs are defeated. 


EL-434 

Inside of three entangling webs is EL-434, 
along with the mangled remains of a weaver 
who spun the first entangling web. EL-434 is 
tearing himself free of the multiple webs, a 
feat which takes at least three rounds. If the 
players are doing well in the battle, delay EL- 
434's liberation. 

When the assassin Droid emerges from the 
web, he spends a round assessing the 
situation. While he enjoys the prospect of 
killing Rebels, he will not attack them in the 
hall unless attacked first. The Droid begins 
to fire into the darkness above the hall, 
aiming for Charon bioscientists. The 
bioscientists wish to disassemble EL-434 and 
find out how a mechanical, unliving being 
developed the ability to override its own 
programming. To Charon bioscientists, this 
development is akin to having a deadly virus 
spontaneously generate in a sterile 
container. It must be studied, then erad- 
icated. EL-434 has other plans. Once out of 
the hall, EL-434 is at best a treacherous ally. 


25, PEHERRETIGSSEREEERECOYENGES Le RE een VR el чо НАЯ 


Zardra 

Put Zardra in play when the battle is well 
underway. Zardra enters the hall from the 
exit portal. She is pursued by Charon 
warriors (one if the PCs already have more 
than enough competition, up to four if the 
PCs have a decided edge; use your own 
markers for the warriors). Ravik requested 
that the Charon hunt her down. 

Zardra is fighting and fleeing with the 
hopes of rejoining Celis Mott or EL-434 and 
finding а way off Desolate. When she sees 
the Rebels her plans shift — after all, their 
ship cannot be any worse off than Celestial. 
If she can strike a deal with the Rebels 
(negotiated during the combat, involving 
transport off Desolate and at least 100 
credits for her services, a mere honorarium 
for a bounty hunter of her caliber), she joins 
the PCs cause. Otherwise, she heads for the 
entrance portal alone. 


Construct Chamber 

This is the bioscientists laboratory. Many 
bodies are stacked in preparation for the 
process that will turn them into Charon 
slaves. Eight bioscientists are here (less any 
killed in the hall of contests). They flee if 
possible, fight if pressed. 

If the Rebels make an Easy search of this 
room, they find an influx capacitor; another 
part for reconstructing their hyperdrive 
motivator. 


Chamber of Sleep 


When the Rebels enter this area. Read: 


Silence fills this web-covered chamber. 
Across the room you see another crawltube 
rising up to the next level. Because of the 
low-hanging covering of webs, you cannot 
see the ceiling of this room. As you walk 
toward the crawltube you hear a light 
scratching sound. It becomes louder, more 
insistent. Then you hear the sounds of 
tearing material. 


The Charon warriors awaken from their 
sleeping pods as the PCs enter the room. 


Event Eight: The Charon Awake 

The Rebels see the pods above split open 
as the Charon emerge. The Charon warriors 
then lower themselves through the webbing 
to snuff the hated life-spark that each PC 
possesses. 

There are 200 Charon awakening in this 
room, but only five are ready for battle on 


Я ЖА. Ағы Почта Бый ба Ту + ЖШ 


the first round of combat. If the PCs run 
toward the crawltube immediately, they 
escape these horrors. Otherwise, they have 
to fight their way to the tube. After every six 
rounds of combat, another five Charon 
emerge to join the battle. 

The Charon can use the tube more 
efficiently than the Rebels. It is up to the PCs 
to somehow block off the lower level using 
either concentrated blaster fire or 
explosives. Either attempt causes the walls 
of the tube to collapse, sealing the army of 
Charon warriors below. 


pisode Six 
Into The Nest 


Summary 

In this episode, the Rebels have reached 
Desolate's summit. Here they confront 
Grand Moff Ravik and the Charon leader 
Вег'аѕсо in order to save themselves — and 
the galaxy they left behind! 


Platform Four Encounters 
and Events 


The Ship's Brain 

The crawltube opens into a chamber built 
around the power core. This is the ship's 
"brain, the organic computer that controls 
the ships systems. А jumbled mass of coils 
grows from the core, and thousands of 
tendrils of varying thickness branch through 
the room to disappear into the walls. The 
chamber hums and pulses with energy. The 
noise, compared to the gravelike silence of 
the rest of the ship, is deafening. 


The Altar of Death 

This chamber is the Charon temple, 
dedicated to the black hole that destroyed 
their home world. In the center stands a 
solid black monolith. The monolith has an 
aura of death about it, and Force-sensitive 
Rebels dislike it immediately. This object 
epitomizes the total lack of Force the PCs 
have felt throughout the ship, and like a 
black hole it pulls at the Rebels life forces. 
The effects of the monolith wounds all the 
Rebels; the wound disappears as soon as 
they leave this chamber. Medpacs or other 
healing can repair the wound, but it 
reappears two rounds after healing. A 
character who makes a Difficult contro! roll 
ignores the effects of the monolith. 


Monolith: STR 7D+2, temporarily wounds 
living creatures other than Charon. 


Event Nine: The Cathorn 
The Cathorn is another Charon construct. 
Once a large armored cat creature, the 


a ص‎ ——————————— ы 
ARI ——————————— 


Cathorn now has these features plus one 
other. Grafted to its undead body is the 
spiked tail of an Ithorian Barbed Flyer 
(captured from a lost ship), giving it an 
additional attack from this new appendage. 
The Cathorn leaps into the altar of death 
chamber and battles the PCs to the best of 
its ability. It goes after Force-using Rebels 
first. The construct, not being alive, is not 
affected by the power of the monolith. 


The Cathorn: DEX 4D, PER ID, STR 30+1 
(4D+1 with armor). Claw attack damage 
50+2, spiked tail damage 4D- 1. 


The Living Computer 

This is another of the living computers 
found throughout the ship. Its description is 
the same as the one on level two. The 
computer has many brain nodes throughout 
this level, including the nest, which allow 
communication with the main systems. 

Accessing a brain node is not difficult, but 
it is not for the queasy. A PC who thrusts his 
hand into а brain node feels a grinding at 
his fingertips as thousands of microincisions 
are made and minifilaments attach to nerve 
endings. Communication connection 
established, a PC may attempt to use the 
computer on а Difficult computer 
programming/ repair roll. The computer net 
does understand Basic after Ber ' asco had 
Ravik go through connection апа 
translation. The computer will give 
information, but will not change the status of 
the ship in any way. Only Ber'asco has 
clearance for that, clearance established by 
thought and DNA pattern matching. 


The Nest 

Underneath an unusual web dome, the 
nest is Desolate's command bridge. The light 
from otherspace streams through the dome 
creating strange shadows in this area. A 
command center, built to accommodate the 


La БЫ БЕЛЬЕ анатты OM 


alien physiology of the Charon, fills the 
room. Through two alcoves the PCs can see 
smaller organic computers. 


Event 10: Grand Moffs' Gambit 

Ravik learned much from the holopark, 
including the Charon language, and figured 
out how to turn the Charon to his side. 
Appealing to the spider-beings' lust for 
death, he negotiated with Ber'asco to lead 
the Charon to a new galaxy if they would 
help him destroy his enemies. The Charon 
ostensibly agreed. 

Ravik is smart enough not to trust the 
Charon more than necessary. He hopes to 
recruit the Rebels to his cause, using them 
as envoys to the rest of the Alliance. He 
wants the Alliance to work with and act as a 
balance against the Charon until the Empire 
is finished. Ravik plans to consolidate his 
position after the victory, replacing the 
Emperor as the leading power in the galaxy. 
If the Alliance is destroyed in the process, so 
be it. Read: 


You hear the faint rustling of Charon 
warriors as they move on strands far above 
you. Shadows seem to melt from a figure 
standing 15 meters away. As he steps into 
the light, you see that it is the tall, thin 
man from Celestial's hololog. "I am Grand 
Moff Ravik. I am hoping you have the 
sense and decency to join me in a grand 
and noble cause — the annihilation of 
Emperor Palpatine and the New Order." 


PR ene ee CRIME HN INN UNS лш с=с. кукш, МАШИ 


fi 
3 


lI 
EN 
~ 


UG 


The Grand Moff tries to play down the 
Charon's obsession with death and 
emphasize their usefulness in dethroning 
the Emperor. Ravik also overstates his 
ability to control the Charon in order to 
quiet fears about the danger the Charon 
pose to the Alliance and the free worlds. 


Event 11: Meeting Ber asco 

Once they have accepted or rejected 
Ravik's offer, the Rebels meet Ber asco. 
Read: 


The Charon above you become a hurry 
of brushing, scraping motion, as waves of 
sharp clacking sounds roll back and forth 
across the canopy of darkness. Then they 
stop. А tall armored figure emerges from 
behind a mass of fibrous coils. The figure 
is one of the spider-beings you have been 
battling, larger, more ponderous than the 
rest. He pauses, and the diffuse glow of an 
activated computer node reflects in ripples 
off his armor. The being rasps his claws 
together is greeting. The dozens of Charon 
in the darkness above mimic the greeting 
in unison. 


If the Rebels have made a deal with Ravik, 
use "The Speech" below. If they attack, 
Ber'asco plunges a clawed hand into the 
brain node to command the computer to 
defend him. As his armor deflects the first 
few shots, he has time to arrange his 
defense. Go directly to "Defense of The 
Nest." 


һе Nest Grave 
Tangled within a large web are some 


20 men and women, the last of Celestial's 
crew. Venom has destroyed their minds 
but left their bodies intact. Ravik offered 
the crew to Ber'asco as a gesture of the 
Moff's sincerity. 

Neatly stored in the web, suspended 
near the bodies of the crew, are 10 Charon 
vac suits. While these suits are not built 
for humans, the Rebels can fit into them. 
They function as normal vacuum suits, 
providing an artificial environment for 
survivial in deep space. 

A final item can be found within the 
nest. It is the realspace compensator, the 
final piece needed for the Rebels to build 
а hyperdrive motivator. Вегавсо brought 
the piece to the nest to have Ravik 
explain the design of the compensator. 


The Speech: If Ber'asco is allowed to speak, 
he sinks a claw into the brain node. The 
voice generated by the organic computer is 
in Basic, but sounds rasping and alien. “The 
disease rarely has vectored to Desolate, 
never before within The Nest. Your strain is 
most resistant. Ravik-culture has convinced 
me of your value in service to the Void. I am 
the Final Prophet of the Charon. I am 
Вегавсо. Submit to the will of Void; 
bioscientists can evaluate, cultivate your 
strain. Agree to construction; we shall cross 
you with finest of Charon warriors. You 
accept our offer?" 

Вегавсо shows patience with the Rebels 
as long as they can convince him there is 
some chance they will agree to his proposal. 
If the Rebels stall for too long, or act 
aggressively, Ber asco defends the nest. 
From Ber'asco's point of view, aggressive 
actions include trying to "infect" (move to) 
other areas within the nest. 

What if the PCs join Berasco? The first 
step is to be injected with Charon poison; if 


YP—M‏ — — ججج ا 
АР...‏ 


the PCs go that far the adventure is over. 
Ber'asco has won. Let the PCs know that 
they become NPCs if they become 
constructs, as they lose their free will. 


Defense of the Nest: Ber'asco activates the 
nest's defenses if the Rebels do not submit 
to his will. Six tendrils snap free and swing 
toward the Rebels. Each tendril is capped 
with a glowing sphere that fires plasma bolts 
once per combat round. іп addition, each of 
these tendrils has two appendages of its 
own which it uses to capture and hold prey. 
Once this battle starts, Ber asco moves into 
the darkness of the hall, commanding his 
warriors to evacuate the nest, but guard all 
membranous entrances from the other side. 


Brain Tendrils: DEX 3D, PER 2D+2, STR 
2D+2. Plasma bolt damage 30+1. If an 
appendage hits, it wraps around a PC and 
reduces Dexterity by 1D. 

Once the Rebels appear to be on their way 
to victory against the brain tendrils, read: 


Ber'asco is illuminated by the activation 
of several brain nodes. His armor shifts, 
drops over his eyes and seals completely, 
one limb connected to a node. Still 
translating, the computer says, "Cleanse the 
wound." The slow rending sound is lost as 
the dome tears open and a great howl of 
air escapes the ship. You don't have long 
before you too are pulled into the vacuum 
of otherspace. 


The Rebels have six rounds to get into the 
Charon vac suits before they are expelled 
into space. Getting into an unwieldy Charon 
vac suit while being pulled by the force of 
the exiting air requires two rounds. Rebels 
must make an Easy Strength roll each round. 
Combined action is possible, with no more 
than two characters trying to cram a Rebel 
into a suit. 

Very Easy Dexterity rolls let the PCs catch 
the outside of the dome. The sticky pads on 
the vac suit appendages provide adhesion to 
the outside of the ship. The Rebels must 
climb across the outer hull to reach their 
own ship and episode seven. 


СО ПЕ сс чєк уез УЖ ыы E Ч 


pisode Seven 


Back to Realspace 


Summary 

The Rebels must make their escape under 
harrowing conditions. Not only must they 
climb across the outside of the alien ship 
while wearing alien vac suits, they must 
rebuild their hyperdrive engine while deadly 
Charon starfighters attack. 


Escaping Desolate 

The Rebels must make their way back to 
the entry pod where they left their ship. 
Crossing the pocked, irregular surface is 
slow work. Moving at a walk requires an 
Easy Dexterity (or climbing/ jumping) roll, 
moving at a run (or while dodging) requires 
a Difficult Dexterity or climbing/ jumping 
roll. Failure means loss of adhesion to the 
surface; the character begins to float away 
from the surface of Desolate, as the ship has 
an extremely low natural gravity. 

The Rebels have to cross 100 meters of the 
craggy surface to reach the cave and their 
ship. The Rebels can see vac-suited Charon 
emerging from portals behind, slowly 
gaining on them. 


Returning fo the Rebels Ship 

When the Rebels enter the entry pod, they 
find their ship where they left it — but it is 
covered with thick layers of webbing! Four 
Charon warriors await the PCs, ready to stop 
them from entering their craft. As they finish 
off these warriors, they see dozen upon 
dozen upon score more warriors boiling 
across the floor, walls and ceiling toward 
The Long Shot. 


What Happened to Zardra? 

If Zardra went her own way in the Hall of 
Contests (or was tossed off a platform by a 
construct, to catch herself far down in the 
webbing), she made her way to The Long 
Shot before the Rebels. As the PCs engage 
the Charon warriors, read: 


E O жасы ы с у ЕТСЕ БИТ e 


А warrior leaps for you — а gun turret 
on The Long Shot turns and fires on the 
Charon, reducing it to a burnt husk. A 
familiar voice crackles over your com unit, 
"Darlings, І am feeling most generous 
today. Forget my fee — kill those three 
pests to prove you are worth my trouble 
while I discourage our pursuit. When you 
are finished І shall open the hatch and we 
can leave. Do hurry. My markmanship 
isn't good enough to kill all of those 
things." 


Putting it all Back Together 

The Rebels can take off under sublight 
speed as they begin to put their hyperdrive 
engine back together. They need all five 
parts: the hypercoil, the influx capacitor, 
power coupler, 4-axial stabilizer, and the 
realspace compensator. A Very Difficult 
starship repair roll is needed to rush the 
repairs and get it working perfectly — time 
is very short and not all the parts are in 
pristine condition. If the Rebels are willing 
to fuse their motivator for good, they can 
switch some parts around and get it to work 
on an Easy starship repair roll. Do not tell 
the players the difficulties of the initial 
repair attempt — let them try for the Very 
Difficult. If they fail the Rebels hear that 
awful noise as they try to jump to 
hyperspace. Then let them switch the parts, 
and make the jump. 


The Charon Starfighters 

While the Rebels repair the ship, the pilot 
notices two blips on the screen, a pair of 
Charon starfighters at long range. Another 
pair of starfighters engage the Rebels at long 
range after three rounds of combat. The 
Rebels must battle them until the engine is 
repaired. 

More starfighters are erupting from the 


surface of Desolate, but they cannot reach 
the PCs before the hyperspace motivator is 
repaired. 


Charon Starfighters: Hyperdrive Multiplier: 
none. Sublight speed 5D+1; Maneuverability 
2D; Hull 3D«2. Weapons: Tri- laser pulse- 
cannon (fire linked, damage pulsed); fire 
control 1D+2; combined damage 7D. Shields: 
1D. 

Pilot: starship piloting 5D, starship shields 
5D. Gunner: starship gunnery 40+2. 


Realspace or Bust! 

The Charon are closing fast, but the 
hyperdrive engine is ready to fire. An Easy 
astrogation roll to plot a course, an Easy 
piloting roll, and: 


The storm-gray expanse shifts and 
expands as your ship leaps forward. For 


long moments only black stars streak by. 
Then you see light and color as your ship 
enters hyperspace. The instruments check 
out and you lean back to wait. Stars move 
by in colored rainbows, then they shift 
back to normal as you emerge into 
realspace. 


Rewards 

Give each player between 5 and 10 skill 
points for completing this adventure. If the 
PCs discovered what they could about the 
Charon, engaging Ber'asco and Ravik in 
conversation to uncover information rather 
than immediate gunplay, nudge the reward 
to the top of the range. Replace any Force 
Points used during the adventure and award 
additional Force Points for exemplary play. 
See page 94 of the roleplaying rulebook to 
refresh your memory on awarding skill and 
Force Points. 


ut-Away to Otherspace 
Read aloud: 

EXTERIOR: THE ALIEN SHIP DESOLATE. 
The camera pans the dark surface, 
sweeping up toward the web dome. 
Pan №... 

INTERIOR: THE NEST. Ber'asco sits 
within the command center, idly dis- 
assembling a Rebel blaster. Bioscientists 
scurry by carrying surgical instruments and 
things which look wet and unwholesome. 
He addresses someone we cannot see. 

"The others of your strain have fled, 
running to hide in a place we cannot yet 
reach. The Void is disappointed. Ravik- 
culture is all we have left. We are taking 
utmost precautions in constructing you. 
When you are free of the disease you shall 
lead us to your strain. The Void is patient. 
Soon its patience shall be rewarded." 

Cut to ... 

CREDITS AND CLOSING THEME. 


The Roleplaying Game 
RULES UPGRADE 


The following upgrades should be made to your Star Wars: The 
Roleplaying Game rulebook. They replace the previously publish- 
ed rules. Any rules not covered in this upgrade remain the same 
as they appear in the rulebook. These upgrades were instituted to 
increase enjoyment of the game, clarify certain rules questions, and 
to further enhance the movie-like spirit of the original rules set. 


Difficulty Numbers 


The difficulty numbers listed for each type of task are guidelines, 
numbers which can vary from task to task, even when the tasks 
are similar. They were not intended to be absolutes. Swinging across 
a shaft in the Death Star, one hand on a rope, the other around 
a princess, is a difficult task. So is swinging across a mine shaft while 
being pursued by stormtroopers. But the Death Star is the Death 
Star; swinging across a mine shaft is a bit easier, although it's still 
tougher than a moderate task. To reflect this in the game, the dif- 
ficulty numbers are now presented as a scale. 


Task Description Difficulty Number Scale 


Very Easy 3-5 
Easy 6-10 
Moderate 11-15 
Difficult 16-20 
Very Difficult 21-30 


There are similar scales for combat, knowledge, general 
knowledge, and medpac use. See the revised "Difficulty Number 
Chart" at the end of this pullout. 

Certain types of tasks can and should be scaled according to cir- 
cumstances. Medpac difficulty numbers, for example, are based on 
the extent and severity of damage. Was a PC wounded by a single 
blaster bolt? Use 6 as the difficulty number. Was a PC wounded by 
a thermal detonator? Slide the difficulty number up toward the top 
end of the wounded scale, which has a maximum of 10. 

Until your PCs have advanced to a great degree, use the task- 
related difficulty numbers at the low end of the scale. These numbers 
will provide exciting challenges without frustrating players with im- 
possible tasks. Reserve the top end for exceptional circumstances. 


Combat (Revised) 


Sequencing 
To provide a faster, simpler combat environment that makes 
visualization easier, we have redefined the combat sequence. The 


new sequence divides combat into combat rounds. Each round 
represents five seconds. Each round is divided into the following 
five segments. You keep on playing one combat round after another 
until one side is dead or has fled or surrendered. 

Each combat round follows this sequence (which replaces the 
sequence on page 46 of the rulebook): 


1. Declare Actions. Characters declare all actions for this combat 
round. The full dodge option must be declared now. The character 
(PC or NPC) with the lowest Dexterity code declares actions first, 
followed by the other characters in ascending order of Dexterity. 


2. Declare Reaction Skills. Characters declare combat dodges. 
The character (PC or NPC) with the lowest Dexterity code declares 
first, followed by the other characters in ascending order of Dexterity. 


3. Roll Reaction Skills. Characters who declared the use of reac- 
tion skills (full or combat dodges) roll skill dice. The gamemaster 
determines the to-hit difficulty numbers for this combat round. 


4. Roll Actions. Characters who declared actions roll skill dice. 
Actions are resolved in descending order of the number of haste 
actions taken; a character who takes three haste actions would act 
before a character who took one or two haste actions. Actions with 
the same degree of haste are resolved simultaneously, with all non- 
movement actions occurring first, then all movement. 


9. Calculate Damage. Roll damage and strength dice for all targets 
which were hit, and determine the effects according to the "Damage 
Summary" chart. Any targets hit early in the "roll actions" segment 
because of haste actions must calculate damage at that time, before 
lesser hastes or simultaneous actions occur. These damage results 
affect the outcomes of the remaining actions in the segment. 


Actions 

Actions, which must be declared during the first segment of a 
combat round, are movement, skill and attribute use, haste, and 
preparation. 


Movement during a combat round is either a walk or a run. А 
character can walk up to five meters without any penalty. А гип- 
ning character can move up to 10 meters, but this counts as ап 
action. Remember, every action after the first one costs 1D. Reduce 
any skill or attribute roll made while running by 1D. As a bonus, 
running characters add 1D to their full or combat dodges (see below). 
In these revised rules, there are no movement points. 


GEILE GER USENET ee LE AC EC OMEN TE 


Haste allows a character to perform his actions first during the "roll 
actions" segment. Every haste a character declares counts as one 
action. The character declaring the greatest number of haste actions 
performs the first actions. 

Note: Actions by subsequent characters must take into account any 
damage results that occur due to the haste actions. 


Preparing an action lets a character increase one skill code by 1D 
on the next combat round. During the round that a character 
prepares, he can do nothing else. In the next round, he makes his 
improved skill roll. 


Dodging and Other Reaction Skills 
There are now two options available when using a reaction skill 
— a full reaction and a combat reaction. 


Full dodge is similar to the dodge rule described in the basic rules. 
You add the number a character rolls using his dodge skill to the 
difficulty number of the attacker. The character making the full 
dodge must move at full speed (take a running action) although he 
does not have to move the full distance allowed. He cannot per- 
form any other action that round. In a starship combat situation, 
a full evasion would require the pilot to do nothing except try to 
attempt a fancy maneuver in hopes of decreasing his ships chances 
of being hit. Other crew members, however, can use other skills 
this round — including starship gunnery. See "Evasion" for details. 
details. 


Combat dodge allows a character to substitute his skill roll for the 
attacker's difficulty number. The defender rolls his dodge dice, and 
then chooses the difficulty number of the attack, either his dodge 
roll or the original difficulty number. The combat dodge lowers a 
character's skill codes by 1D for that combat round. 


One reaction skill roll affects all combat directed at a target for 
the entire combat round. 


Combined Actions 

Two or more characters can now combine their actions for a single 
round in order to more effectively accomplish a single task. To per- 
form a combined action, all characters involved must declare they 
are combining. One of the involved characters must be chosen to 
actually perform the action, using his skill code for the roll; others 
involved are simply adding support. For every additional character 
(other than the chosen one) involved in the action, add one pip 
for every full die of skill or attribute or Fire Control the supporting 
characters have. Then roll once for each combined action declared. 

Example: Two stormtroopers and an Imperial officer declare a 
combined shot at one PC. One trooper is chosen to roll his blaster 
skill code of 3D. The other trooper (3D) and the officer (2D +1) add 
one pip for each full die of skill they have, for a total of +5. So 
the chosen trooper rolls 3D +5 to make the difficulty number deter- 
mined by the gamemaster. 

Every combined action counts as one action. Reduce every in- 
volved character s skill or attribute codes accordingly, depending 
on the number of actions declared in a round. 

Example: The two stormtroopers and the Imperial officer declare 
two combined shots at one PC. Their skill codes are each reduced 
by ID for taking two actions. The troopers now have blaster codes 
of 2D, and the officer has a code of 1D +1. So the chosen trooper 
rolls 2D +3 twice to make the difficulty number. 

Combined shot damage is calculated normally. For each hit, roll 
the damage dice of the chosen weapon. Do not combine the damage 
dice of every weapon involved. In effect, every combined shot is 
actually a volley of shots directed at a specific target in order to 
secure a hit. 

Note: When using this rule, the gamemaster must take into 
account the sorts of actions which can be combined. Actions which 


are strictly individual actions may not be combined. For ins! 
TIE pilots may not use a combined action to increase their 
speeds. The speed of each TIE fighter is independent of the : 
of another. They may use a combined action, however, to fire 
a Rebel vessel. 


Stance 

A character can either be standing or prone. For game pur} 
standing includes crouching, kneeling, or any position in wl 
character is not lying down to avoid fire. Prone is deliberate 
ing down to avoid fire. А character can fall prone at any time wi 
penalty. À character who is prone can get up and use skills i 
same combat round, but this counts as an action. Prone char: 
are harder to hit; add +2 when determining to-hit difficulty nun 


Damage Effects 

Stun results now reduce all skill and attribute codes of the 1 
by 1D for the rest of this combat round and the next combat ! 
only. However, strength codes are used at full value when res 
damage. Stun effects are cumulative. А character stunned 
times in the same combat round would reduce his codes t 
through the next combat round. 


Grenades and Thermal Detonators 
To determine distance scattered (in meters), roll 1D at short r 
2D at medium range, and 3D at long range. 


Optional Combat Rules — Surprise 
Surprise gives a character two free haste actions for the co 
round. These actions do not lower any of his die codes. 


Example of Play (Combat) 

Four Rebels encounter seven Imperials in the corridor of a: 
station. They are at medium range to each other, and all char: 
are armed with blaster pistols. 

The Rebel group consists of a pilot (DEX 3D, blaster 5D, c 
4D, STR 3D), an engineer (DEX 2D +1, blaster 3D +1, dodge 3 
STR 2D+2), a smuggler (DEX 3D+1, blaster 5р +1, dodge 4 
STR 3D), and a Wookiee (DEX 2D +2, blaster 4D+2, dodge З 
STR 5D). 

The Imperials include a bounty hunter (DEX 4D, blaster 6D, с 
50, STR 3D +2), and six stormtroopers (DEX 1D, blaster 3D, с 
3D, STR 3D). 

Both groups decide to attack, so combat must be resolved e 
ding to the combat sequence. We've described the first rou 
combat so that you can see how all the elements work tog: 

1. Declare Actions. Characters declare actions in DEX order, 
lowest to highest. 

Stormtroopers *1 and *2 combine with the bounty hunter tc 
one shot at the Wookiee. 

Stormtroopers *3 and *4 combine to take one shot at the eng 

Stormtrooper %5 takes one shot at the pilot. 

Stormtrooper “6 takes one shot at the smuggler. 

The engineer declares a full dodge. 

Тһе Wookiee decides to take a haste action to move to « 
then take one shot at the bounty hunter. 

The pilot falls prone (increasing the difficulty number to hit 
+2), then fires twice (once at trooper *2 and once at troope 

The smuggler takes a haste action to shoot once at the bc 
hunter. 

The bounty hunter combines his fire with stormtroopers * 
*2 to take one shot at the Wookiee. 


2. Declare Reaction Skills. The bounty hunter is the 
character to declare a combat dodge. 

3. Roll Reaction Skills. At medium range, the difficulty nu 
to hit is 11. Reaction skills could increase that number. All char: 


ac Е, ИТ ОУ Нак СЕР НАЛЫ с р, шш) 


who declared reaction skills roll their dice. 

The engineer rolls his full dodge. He rolls a 13 and adds that 
number to the difficulty number, increasing it to 24. 

The bounty hunter rolls his combat dodge. He rolls a 17 and 
decides to substitute that for the difficulty number. 

4. Roll Actions. Haste actions are rolled first, then other actions. 
Smuggler declared two actions, a haste and a shot at the bounty 
hunter. Reducing his skill by 1D, he has 4D+1 to make a difficulty 
17. He rolls 16+1 for a 17, a hit! Damage for this haste action is 
calculated now. Smuggler rolls a 12 for damage, bounty hunter rolls 
a 15. The bounty hunter is stunned; his codes are reduced by 1D 
for the rest of this round and all of the next. 

Wookiee uses his haste to move to medium cover (+2), increas- 
ing the difficulty number to hit him to 13. 

All other actions, which have the same degree of haste, occur 
simultaneously. They can be resolved in any order. 

Stormtroopers *3 and *4 take a combined shot at the engineer. 
The chosen trooper rolls his 3D, adding 3 pips from the other trooper. 
That makes it 3D+3 to get a 24. He rolls а 10, a miss! 

Stormtrooper *5 shoots at the pilot. He has 3D to roll a 13. He 
rolls an 11, a miss! 

Stormtrooper *6 shoots at the smuggler. He has 3D to roll an 11. 
He rolls a 12, a hit! 

The bounty hunter rolls his dice, 6D reduced by 2D due to actions 
and stun. The two stormtroopers add 6 pips so the bounty hunter 
has 4D +6 to roll a 13, the difficulty number to hit the Wookiee. 
He rolls a 12-6 for an 18, a hit! 

The Wookiee shoots at the bounty hunter with 4D +2, reduced 
by ID because he took two actions. He needs a 17. He rolls an 11, 
a miss! 

The pilot shoots twice with 5D, reduced by 1D because he took 
two actions. He needs an 11. He rolls a 12 and a 14, two hits! 

5. Calculate Damage. Fach target hit rolls STR dice against 
damage dice to determine the extent of damage. 

The smuggler rolls 9, but the damage roll is 12. Hes wounded! 

The Wookiee is hit for 15 damage, but he rolls a 24. He's only 
stunned. 

Stormtrooper *2 and stormtrooper *5 roll 10 and 11, but the 
damage rolls are 14 and 17 respectively. They're both wounded! 


At the end of the first round of combat, the smuggler is wounded 
(codes reduced by 1D), the Wookiee is stunned (reduced by 1D 
through the end of round two), stormtroopers *2 and *5 are wound- 
ed, and the bounty hunter is stunned through the next round. 

Will the Rebels win the day? Or will the Imperials combine their 
powers to overwhelm our heroes? Only subsequent combat rounds 
will tell. 


Starship Combat Sequence 


Each starship combat round follows this sequence (which replaces 
the sequence on page 61 of the rulebook): 


1. Declare Actions. Characters declare all actions for this combat 
round. The full evasion option must be declared now, as well as 
attempts to increase and decrease range during the "roll actions" 
segment. The character (PC or NPC) with the lowest Dexterity code 
declares actions first, followed by the other characters in ascending 
order of Dexterity. 


2. Declare Reaction Skills. All pilots declare combat evasions. 
The character (PC or NPC) with the lowest Dexterity code declares 
first, followed by the other characters in ascending order of Dexterity. 


3. Roll Reaction Skills. All pilots who declared the use of reac- 
tion skills (full or combat evasions) roll skill dice. Shield operators 
roll for shielding attempts. The gamemaster determines the to-hit 
difficulty numbers for this combat round. 


4. Roll Actions. Characters who declared actions roll skill dice. Ac- 
tions are resolved in descending order of the number of haste ac- 
tions taken; a character who takes three haste actions would act 
before a character who took one or two haste actions. Actions with 
the same degree of haste are resolved simultaneously, with all non- 
movement actions occurring first, then all movement. 


5. Calculate Damage. Roll damage and hull dice for all targets 
which were hit, and determine the effects according to the "Damage 
Summary" chart. Any targets hit early in the "roll actions" segment 
because of haste actions must calculate damage at that time, before 
lesser hastes or simultaneous actions occur. These damage results 
effect the outcomes of the remaining actions in the segment. 


Evasion 


Full evasion is the evasion described in the rulebook. If a pilot 
chooses a full evasion, he may perform no other action that round. 
This is different from the full dodge; in full evasion, the evading 
ship cannot increase its range. Piloting rolls are only made to deter- 
mine if the attacking ship moves closer; if the evader rolls higher, 
the range remains the same; if the attacker rolls higher, the range 
decreases by one step. 

When a pilot declares a full evasion, he is desperately trying to 
avoid enemy fire. His efforts make it considerably more difficult 
to hit his ship. Such a wildly gyrating, unpredictable flight path also 
makes it more difficult for any gunners on the evading ship to hit 
their targets; add the evasion roll to the difficulty number to hit 
enemy ships. 


Combat evasion functions exactly as a combat dodge. The pilot may 
choose to substitute his skill and maneuver roll for the attacker's 
difficulty number. А combat evasion has no effect on the fire of 
gunners aboard the evading ship, or on piloting rolls (except for 
the action cost). 


Shielding 

Shielding is a reaction skill, declared during the "declare reac- 
tion skills" segment of the starship combat sequence. Shield attempts 
are made during the "roll reaction skills" segment. The shield 
attempt roll is added to the difficulty number of the attacker. This 
sum is called the shield number. lf the attacker rolls above the dif- 
ficulty number to hit, but less than the shield number, he hits the 
ship but the shield dice are added to the hull dice when calculating 
damage. 

Example: The pilot of Silver Bolt rolls an 18 for a combat eva- 
sion against TIE fighters at short range, choosing that number in- 
stead of the difficulty number of 6. The co-pilot, operating the 
shields, rolls a 16. The shield number is 34. If the TIE fighter pilots 
roll 17 or less, they miss Silver Bolt. If they roll 18 through 33 they 
hit the ship, but the shields help protect the hull. If the TIE pilots 
roll 34 or better, they hit the ship while avoiding the shields; only 
hull dice are rolled to resist damage. 


Starship Damage 

The description of ship ionization (page 63 of rulebook) is modified 
as follows. 

If shields were not used successfully, or the ship has no shields, 
or all shields are blown, when a ship is lightly damaged its controls 
are ionized. АП ship codes (except hull) are reduced by 1D for the 
rest of this round and the next combat round only. The ship and 
crew may take actions with the decreased die codes; they do not 
have to forfeit a round. The ship recovers from ionization at the 
end of the next combat round. 


Other Vehicles 

The starship combat sequence is used whenever the combatants 
are in vehicles. A speeder bike chase uses the same sequence as 
a dog-fight between starfighters. 


учн ы есуу eee AT е Oe ar Se ae 2 


SIAR WARS CHARIS AND TABLES UPGRADE 


standard journey 
no nav computer 
hasty entry 

light damage 

heavy damage 

each extra day taken 


This section 
replaces the 
bottom portion 
of the “Astro- 
gation Chart" 
on page 140 of 
the roleplaying 
game rulebook. 


STARSHIP 
COMBAT SEQUENCE 


. Declare Actions. Characters declare 
all actions for this combat round. 
Full evasion option, and attempts to 
increase or decrease range, must be 
declared now. Lowest DEX declares 
first, then others in ascending order. 


each day saved 
GE ы акы ы ш | Damage | Difficulty Scale | 
AG AEs ы ы d Melee Weapons Damage Difficulty Scale 
DEX declares first, then others in This section hands str 3.5 
ascending order. replaces the club str « ID 


. Roll Reaction Skills. All pilots who bottom portion | gaderffii str+1D 
declared use of reaction skills (full or of the “Weapons spear str+1D+1 
combat evasions) roll skill dice. Chart” on page | vibroaxe str+2D 
Shield attempts roll now, as well. GM 139 of the role- Уаде str+1D+2 
determines to-hit difficulty numbers playing game ПОГА sD** 
for this combat round. rulebook. TEES dS 


. Roll Actions. All characters who de- 
clared actions roll skill dice. Actions 
are resolved in descending order of 
the number of haste actions taken. 
Actions with the same degree of 
haste are resolved simultaneously, 
with all non-movement actions 
occuring first, then all movement. 


. Calculate Damage. Rol! damage. Combat 
hull, and shield dice of hit targets. Situation 


° Damage at point-blank range (see SW. RPG page 47). °° Characters with the control skill add skill 
code damage. Anything less than 3 meters away is point-blank range for ranged weapons. 


DIFFICULTY NUMBER CHART Terrain 


Difficulty Scale Light Cover 


Very Easy 
Easy 
Moderate 
Difficult 

Very Difficult 


Point-Blank Range 
Short Range 
Medium Range 
Long Range 


Everyone Knows 

Common Knowledge 

No Secret, But Not Widely Known 
Specialized Knowledge 

Expert Knowledge 


Pretty Ignorant 

Knows a Little 

Broad General Knowledge 
Specific, Detailed Knowledge 
Truly Comprehensive Knowledge 


Wounded 
Incapacitated 
Mortally Wounded 


This section 
replaces the top 
portion of the 
"Healing Table" 
Wounded on page 140 of 
Incapacitated the roleplaying 


Mortally Wounded game rulebook. 


Medium Cover 

Heavy Cover 

Aperture adjacent to firer 
Door (otherwise) 
Window (otherwise) 

Slit (otherwise) 


Target Size (personal combat only) 


less than І cm tall 
1 - 10 cm 

11 - 50 cm 

51 ст - 99 ст 

1 - 3 m 

3-9 т 

10 - 99 м 

100 m ог larger 


COMBAT SEQUENCE 


. Declare Actions. Characters declare all actions for this com- 
bat round (movement, skill or attribute use, haste, or full 
dodge). PC or NPC with lowest DEX declares first, then others 
in ascending order. 


. Declare Reaction Skills. Characters declare combat dodges. 
PC or NPC with lowest DEX declares first, then others in 
ascending order. 

. Roll Reaction Skills. All characters who declared the use of 
reaction skills (full or combat options) roll skill dice. Game- 
master determines to-hit difficulty numbers for this round. 


. Roll Actions. All characters who declared actions roll skill 
dice. Actions are resolved in descending order of the number 
of haste actions taken. Actions with the same degree of haste 
are resolved simultaneously, with all non-movement actions 
occuring first, then all movement. 


. Calculate Damage. Roll damage, strength dice of hit targets. 


Part * 40100-60 ® & © 1988 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games, Inc.. under authorization. 


% 
Е 
e 
ы 
v6 
= 
>, 
Š 
5 
2 


Тһе 


For use with Star Wars: 


Ф 
| 
- M a 
«= d Е > , 
T у 4 A 
` m " «by 
"LOT "^ * - ' » 
. № а " 2 (1 " : 
‘p Е A 
ух > ` | 
E \ \ 
Я y 
p“ е 
+ s 4 
— A Nag + 
D - ` 
ND ” - а = 
“+” ) "1 
>. < 
1 "M \ 
1 “7 
5 mt 


dim жана. 


” % 
E 
$ 0 
‘ Zim 


“ 


Ға» 

— 

АССУР 
FH | 


” 
Ze 
„2 4 
/ P. 
2. 
AL 
=“ 


Platform Four 


Cut-Away View 


Platform Four 


Platform Three 


| 
үү 


Vat 
Aa | 
WAY, 


” 0 
i 
T 


li И 
1 | | / 


ҮН | 
Was 


ANB ANE. 


"a P 
"Ta 
еде; 


1 
in ' 
X 
E 


4 
із 


ae ж” 


- - y ^'! д, 


4 


en If 


AJS 
че 


ISBN П-87431-1284-Ч% 


4740018 5 


0771887 


