f 


Planets of the Galaxy 
Volume Two 


A Supplement for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game 


ValGames- 


—S TAR WARS 
THE NEW REPUBLIC 


Planets of the Galaxy 


Volume Two 


SAN 
EE. 


S A 


Design: John Terra * Development and Editing: Greg Farshtey 
Graphics: Stephen Crane, Cathleen Hunter 
Cover Art: Lucasfilm, Ltd. 
Interior Art: Rob Caswell, Mike Vilardi 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter « Associate Publisher/Sales Manager: Richard Hawran 
Editors: Greg Farshtey, Bill Smith, Ed Stark « Art Director: Stephen Crane 
Graphic Artists: Cathleen Hunter, John Paul Lona 
Administrative Assistant: Jeff Dennis * Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden 
Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill + Treasurer: Janet Riccio 


Published by 


Wee 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40057 


This and all other products that take place after the events of Return of the Jedi are the author's vision of what may have happened. 
The true fate of the heroes and villains of the Star Wars universe has yet to be revealed by George Lucas and Lucasfilm, Ltd. 


®, ™ and © 1992 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Introduction 


Ee introduction 


The Stock Light Freighter Night Havok shud- 
dered out of hyperspace and into sublight with 
all the grace of a drunken bantha. Kara Saffch, the 
ship’s owner and pilot, relaxed in her seat. 

“I don’t believe we made it!” exclaimed an 
older man, seated next to her. Several other 
people poked their heads into the cockpit from 
the adjacent room. “But did we really?” a young 
man asked, not certain that he wished to know 
the truth. 

“Well ... considering that we're having this 
chat and not fighting off TIE fighters suggests 
that we did,” Kara grinned in her ingratiatingly 
cocky manner. “When you people hired me and 
my brother to take you out of Imperial space, you 
hired the best!” 

“Maybe we survived, but the Night Havok sure 
didn’t,” said a voice from the ship’s intercom. It 
was Kara's kid brother, Willi, technical genius 
and by far the grimmer of the two. “Hyperdrive 
looks like someone set fire to it, shields are gone, 
Icould swear I heard the hull pop a few times, and 
I think the ship’s power plant is about to —” 

Willi’s voice was cut off as ship’s power failed 
and everyone was plunged into darkness. In a few 
heartbeats, eerie green emergency lighting shone 
weakly from the lightpanels. Willi’s voice returned, 
but the reception was far weaker. “ ... Yep, main 
power just gave out and reserve kicked in.” 

Kara stared out the window for a few moments, 
her grin disappearing rapidly. “Willi, meet me at 
the computer,” she barked into the intercom. 

“What is it?” asked the older man. “Listen, I 
hired you to get me and my family away from the 
Empire, and I have a right to know ...” 

“Could be nothing. Could be something. Could 
be the last time this ship ever flies,” Kara mut- 
tered as she left the cockpit. 

Later, as the siblings were busy at work at the 
computer, the older man ambled over and peeked 
over their shoulders. When Willi glared at him, he 


AR. 
ARS 


backed away. “But I only want to know what's 
going on... ” 

“Fine,” Kara sighed. “You paid the fee, you're 
entitled to answers. The ship is moving toward a 
star system...” 

“But that’s wonderful!” the man gushed in 
relief. “You people —” 

“— did nothing,” Kara interrupted. “The ship 
is on reserve power. We shouldn't be moving. 
Apparently, we are caught in some strong gravity 
well.” 

“Which means?” the man prompted. 

“Which means that we are being sucked into 
the Zelos star system, and we can't stop it,” Willi 
finished impatiently. “We’re doomed.” 

“Is the Zelos star system that bad?” the man 
wondered aloud. 

Kara moved aside and let the man approach 
the console so he could read the data coming 
onscreen. “Read for yourself,” she replied. 

The man read the words on the computer 
screen, his face falling further and further the 
more he read. Finally, he loosened his collar, 
cleared his throat, and in a classic example of 
understatement, mumbled, “I don’t think this 
was quite what we had in mind when we paid for 
passage.” 


Toward the Unknown 


The Star Wars galaxy is a huge place. For every 
planet we have read about or seen, there are 
hundreds that have gone unnoticed. Even the 
Empire, which once ruled the galaxy, overlooked 
countless worlds that lay within its jurisdiction. 
And who knows what perils or rewards are wait- 
ing to be found on such planets? Planets of the 
Galaxy, Volume Two is a supplement which de- 
tails eight such planets found in the Star Wars 
galaxy. 

With this book, gamemasters have at their 
disposal the passports to eight planets, each 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


—STA 
-WA 


with its own adventure potential. Each planet is 
unique, with things that can both help and hinder 
your group of players. Some have more adven- 
ture potential than others, but all serve some 
game purpose. 

Planet entries are by no means complete, but 
enough information is given so that the overall 
tone of the world can be easily discerned. This 
lets a gamemaster put his own personal touch to 
a planet, but enables him to still stay within the 
spirit of the planet. 

Each entry is split into three sections. First 
there is general planet information including a 
planet map, log of planetary data, and a brief 
description of the place. Next comes the descrip- 
tions of any alien races native to the world. 
Lastly, details on the planet such as its history, 
notable locations, prominent personalities, ad- 
venture hooks, new equipment and anything else 
relevant to the world. 

There is also a new section in this book, one 
not found in the first volume, called “System 
Datafile.” This section represents a ship’s com- 
puter entry for the planet, which automatically 
comes up when a ship drops out of hyperspace 
and gets within range of a star system. The com- 
puter gets a fix on where the ship is located, runs 
through the starcharts, and if a planet appears, it 
displays the relevant information for the pilot 
and/or navigator. Gamemasters should read this 
small section aloud to the players. Unless other- 
wise indicated, these files were originally culled 
from Imperial databanks, then updated by mer- 
chant organizations or Rebel scouts. 

Remember, space is vast, but so are the plan- 
ets therein. Imagine an alien race visiting Earth, 
landing in the Australian Outback, and believing 
that to be a typical representation of Earth's 
climate and social level. In the same way, each 
planet entry handles but a small portion of each 
planet. It is up to the gamemaster to flesh out 
whatever parts are needed. 

Each planet should be given its own unique 


flavor. The players should be able to see the 
difference in “planetary character,” if you will. 

The information gathered here represents the 
state of the planets two years after the Battle of 
Endor. The Alliance is now referred to as the 
“New Republic,” or just plain “Republic.” 


Planet Log Terrain Key 


Plains 


Desert 
& Craters 

Swamp 

] Forest ^ Hills 


Sor Jungle/Rain Forest ~ Mountains 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Barren Rock 


f= Water 


+ Plateau e City 


Ä Volcano 


x35 Canyon 


= Ice o Site of Interest 


Introduction 


+ Spaceport 


Mike Vilardi 


Algara Il 


Algara Ii Ý A Ween 
ARST 


System Summary 


The Algaran system is located well within the 
New Republic's sphere of influence. Its yellow star, 
Algar, boasts no unusual features. 

The first planet, Kerilt, contains a breathable 
atmosphere and is suitable for habitation. The 
dense jungles and stiflingly high humidity make it 
a daunting place nonetheless. Actual colonization 
has not yet begun. 

Algara II, also known as Algara, is the main 
planet in the system. 

Tonder, the third planet, is an unstable volcanic 
world. Scientists speculate that once it cools down 
(expected to occur sometime in the next three 
thousand years), it could bea viable colony world. 
There is currently a struggle between the Algarian 
Bureau of Planetary Colonization and the Bureau 
of Volcanoes over which has jurisdiction on Tonder. 

Krizzin, the fourth planet, is barren rock with an 
atmosphere, though remote probes have discov- 
ered the existence of underground mineral depos- 
its. Algara V and VI, a gas giant and an ice ball 
respectively, are considered useless. 


Algara 
The planet Algara has normal seasonal varia- 
tions. Springs are wet and windy, summers hot 


System Datafile 
Algaran system, star: Algar, yellow sun. Six planets in 


system, four can sustain life in some fashion. Algara Il, 
otherwise known as Algara, main system planet. 

Algara is a bustling planet, especially the capital city of 
Algarine, site of the starport. Many hard to find goods and 
services may be purchased in Algarine. Algarais amember 
in good standing of the New Republic. 

TRAVELLER'S ADVISORY: Algara is governed by a huge 
and complex bureaucracy. Be prepared to answer a num- 
ber of questions and pay out a significant sum in credits. 
Those whose business concerns stretch the limits of legal- 
ity may wish to avoid Algar. 


“During your visit to our fair planet, won't you consider 
spending some of your time and credits at the Club Prosperine, 
Algara’s most exclusive resort? It has everything an off-world 
guest would ever want! Stop by today!” 


(The preceding message was paid for by the Algara 
Bureau of Tourism, the Algara Board of Interstellar Promo- 
tions, and the Algara Board of Off-Worlder Affairs.) 


and humid, and winters are cold, with significant 
amounts of snowfall. Summer temperatures reach 
25 degrees Centigrade at their zenith, while win- 
ter temperatures can drop as low as 15 degrees 
below zero. 

Algara has four moons, all of them home to 
lunar settlements managed exclusively by 
Algarians. The satellites are, from largest to small- 
est, Tallakron, Radeon, Omakaton, and Kevron. 
Tallakron has a military outpost, Radeon and 
Omakaton have mines, and Kevron has an astro- 
nomical research station. 

Algara was settled by Humans hundreds of 
years ago. The Algarians have standard Human 
statistics and no special abilities. 


Algarian Society 

The words “nightmare bureaucracy” immedi- 
ately spring to the minds of most free-traders 
when the planet Algara is mentioned. Algara has 
rules, regulations, and forms governing every 
conceivable thing and activity on the planet. 

The following paragraphs describe the typical 
routine that most off-worlders have to go through 
in order to set foot on Algara, no matter their 
intent: 

1. The ship enters the Algara system and is 
notified that it must remain in orbit until a cus- 
toms officer can board and inspect it. In the 
meantime, the pilot must fill out an Off-Worlder 
Visitation Intent data disk, which requires the 
following information: names and planet of origin 
ofall crew, nameand type of ship, where ship was 
registered, last planet visited, current cargo 
manifest, and intentions while on Algara. Of 
course, there is a 10 credit filing fee. While the 
pilot is filling this disk out, the customs officer 
and four troopers come aboard and inspect the 
ship for contraband. 

2. Upon successful completion of search, the 
customs officer takes the O.V.I.D.D. from the 
pilot, scans it, then gives the pilot an Inspection 
Clear chip, which certifies that the ship is autho- 
rized to land. There is a five credit filing fee. 

3. Once the ship lands, the harbormaster asks 
the pilot to initialize a Ship Damage Waiver disk, 
which absolves the starport of any responsibility 
for any damage the ship might sustain while 
docked. 

4. Leaving the starport docking area, the char- 
acters move into the personal customs area, 
where they must fill out a Weaponry Declaration 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Type 
Temperate Plains 


Planet Name 


Algara Il 


Type: Terrestrial 
Temperature: Temperate 
Atmosphere: Type | (Breathable) 


Hydrosphere: Moderate 
Gravity: Standard 


Club Prosperine ae 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Algaran 
Star Name: Algar Star Type: Yellow 


ORBITAL BODIES 


[Names| _PlanetType | Moons | 
4 

1 
Algara V 

Ice Ball 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Hemisphere 


World Summary 


The planet Algara is located in a star system well 
away from Imperial space. As the Algaran govern- 
ment supports the New Republic, this distance has 
proven to bea boon to the population. Algara boasts 
three continents, the main one being Kreesis. This 
continent features the planetary capital, Algarine. 

Algara’s major industries include mining, weap- 
ons manufacturing, and the distilling of liquor. Sev- 
eral large, well-known corporations have branch of- 
fices here. Algara depends on a heavy volume of 
business to stay healthy. 

All of those credits that Algarians earn in industry 
go toward importing luxury items as well as manufac- 
tured goods. A free-trader can earn a healthy income 
by dealing with the Algarians, provided he has infi- 
nite patience, for the local bureaucracy is notori- 
ously labyrinthian. 

Algarian society is constructed around a rigid 
class structure, which has led to the formation of a 
pro-Imperial resistance group among the disenfran- 
chised. 


Stephen Crane 


Algara Il 


disk. These data disks must list each weapon that 
each character has. Proof of licensing must be 
furnished, or the weapon is confiscated. 

5. Once the WDD is filled out, the characters 
must purchase a Native Weaponry License for 10 
credits. This permits them to carry weapons 
while on Algara. 

6. Having done all this, characters interested 
in trading must file for a Domestic Business Per- 
mit, which allows them to buy and sell items in 
bulk. Cost of the permit is five percent of the total 
value of the goods to be imported or exported. 

7. Finally, regardless of why they came to Algara, 
they must paya25 credit Visitor's Tax, and are then 
given their Algarian Visitor Identification chip. 

8. Of course, if the characters are bringing 
Droids onto the planet, they must file for an 
Immigrant Droid chip for each, specifying model, 
make, and what skills and attachments it has. 
Each IDC costs five credits, and the Droid is given 
a small bolt marker which classifies it as a legal 
visitor to the planet. 


Algarian Social Structure 


Algarian society is divided into several sharply 
defined classes. The upper classes get the best 
services, prices, seats on transportation, etc. 
Marriages between members of different classes 
are forbidden, and all Algarians and Xan must 
wear badges identifying their rank in the society. 


Members of the lower classes are required by law 
to defer to their “betters.” 

The Algarian social classes, in order, are: 

The Gentry: Wealthy landowners, corporation 
owners — the rich and powerful. 

The Bureaucracy: Upper middle-class Algarians 
who manage government agencies. The Bureau- 
cracy works closely with the Gentry in setting 
Algarian policy. 

The Intelligentsia: People of means who serve 
as scholars, professors, scientists, doctors. 

The Belligerency: Members of the military, re- 
gardless of rank. 

The Prosperines: Business executives, and 
people who work in non-physical occupations 
(computer programmers, bank tellers, customs 
officers) 

The Talents; Skilled laborers, regardless of pro- 
fession. 

The Domestics: The servant class, employed by 
members of the Gentry, Bureaucracy, Intelligen- 
tsia, Belligerency and Prosperines. 

The Drones: Unskilled laborers, grunt workers, 
regardless of profession. 

The Mechanicals: All Droids. 

The Flotsam: Beggars, the insane, and the unem- 
ployed. 

Xan are not allowed to ascend beyond the 
level of Talent. The vast majority are Talents, 
Drones and Domestics. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Sar —————————————— 


The Xan 


The Xan are native to Algara. They are hair- 
less, slender humanoids with large, bulbous 
heads. Their height averages between 1.5 and 
1.75 meters. Skin coloration ranges from pale 
green, to yellow to pink. Their eyes have no 
irises, and are big, round pools of black. Xan 
faces do not show emotion, as they lack the 
proper muscles for expression. 

The only pronounced difference between Xan 
physiology and that of normal Humans is their 
vulnerability to cold. The Xan cannot tolerate 
temperatures below one degree Centigrade. When 
the temperature ranges between zero and minus 
ten degrees Centigrade, Xan fallintoadeepsleep. 
Ifthe temperature goes below minus ten degrees, 
the Xan die. As a result, most Xan live in the 
equatorial regions of Algara. 

Like most sentients in the galaxy, the Xan are 
emotional beings. Their code of behavior is very 
simple: do good to others, fight when your life is 
threatened, and do not let your actions harm 
innocents. 

Life expectancy among the Xan is roughly 80 
years. Xan births are single- offspring (no twins, 
triplets, etc), and a female Xan can give birth 
between the ages of 20 and 50. Unfortunately, the 
Algarians strictly regulate the number of chil- 
dren Xan women can bear. Centuries of Algarian 
domination has resulted in the virtual extinction 
of the Xan culture. What little remains must be 
practiced in secret, in small private gatherings. 
Unfortunately, most Xan have never heard the 
history of their race. Instead, they are fed the 
Algarian version of events, which speaks of Xan 
atrocities against the peace-loving Humans. 

Most Xan can speak Basic as well as their own 
native sign language. A small percentage of the 
Algarians are also trained in the Xan language, to 
guard against any attempts at conspiracy among 
the lower classes. 

The Human colonists’ advanced technology 
allowed them to quickly dominate the Xan, a 
condition that has prevailed for 400 years. The 
vast majority of Xan are classified as Drones, 
doing unskilled, menial work. 

Their status as second-class citizens has turned 
the Xan into a sullen race. They do the work 
required of them, no more, no less, and waste no 
time in complaining about their lot. They do, how- 
ever, nurse asecret sympathy for the Empire. Most 
believe that the freedom the New Republic gives 
each planetary government to conduct its affairs in 
its own way is tantamount to a seal of approval for 
Algarian oppression. The Xan do not believe that 
their lives could be worse under Imperial rule, and 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


believe the Empire might force the Algarians into 
awarding the Xan equal status. 

The Xan are forbidden by Algarian law to travel 
into space. The Algarians do not want their image 
to be tarnished in any way by Xan accusations. 

Average Xan have 2D in all attributes. 


Algarine 

Algarine is the sprawling capital city of the 
planet, and home to one of the most complex 
bureaucracies in the galaxy. A monorail line con- 
nects Algarine with the other major cities on the 
continent, Tivin and Benis, as well as to Club 
Prosperine. 

Algarine is home to 20 million beings, plus an 
additional one million visitors from off-world. It 
isa bustling city with well-stocked shops, crowded 
entertainment centers, humming factories, and 
traffic-clogged streets. It is a city in motion. 

It is difficult to point to one single Algarian as 
the head of the planetary government. Each as- 
pect of life has its own bureau. All of these 
bureaus in turn are overseen by the Bureau of 
Revenue, which collects taxes and tariffs and 
allocates them as the need arises, within pre-set 
limits. The Bureau of Revenue may sound like it 
enjoys a certain amount of autonomy, but it is 


u 
3 


actually composed of one member from each of 
the other Bureaus, all of which still have author- 
ity over their representative. 

A number of corporations have branches in 
Algarine, including Algar Mining (a frequent tar- 
get of sabotage by the Imperial Resistance); 
Feduch Importers, believed by the New Republic 
to be a front for a lucrative smuggling and slaver 
operation; Prosperine Entertainment and Distill- 
eries, operators of Club Prosperine; and Kexeerian 
Blasters Technology. 


Algarian Law 

Algarian law is enforced by on-planet security 
forces as well as a small space fleet, based in 
Algarine. The fleet is composed of a military con- 
figuration Corellian Corvette named the 
Bureaucrat’s Triiumph,andadozen Z-95 Headhunter 
starfighters. 

Captured smugglers and pirates have their car- 
gos ans ships seized, and a fine of 10,000 credits 
levied against them. 

Off-worlders who fail to correct proper data 
are fined 10 times the amount of the standard fee, 
or 100 credits if the diskwork did not require a 
paid fee. Second offenses double the fees. Third 
offenses triple the fees. A fourth offense leads to 
the character being banned from Algara. 


ARS 


Club Prosperine 


The largest resort on Algara, Club Prosperine 
charges 500 credits per night, meals included. 
Here, Algarians and off- worlders alike may rest, 
play, eat, and sleep to their hearts’ content. 
There are sports facilities, casinos, cabarets, 
electronic games of amusement, several fine res- 
taurants and cantinas, and even a service that 
matches up single visitors with each other, based 
on gender, interests, and species. 

Everything in the Club Prosperine screams 
the word “luxury.” Guests are waited on hand 
and foot. Exotic foods and drinks from all over 
the galaxy can be found here. 

The grounds of the Club Prosperine are sur- 
rounded by a power fence to keep out, as the 
club’s owner calls them, “undesirables.” Droids 
are prohibited from entering the Club, 

The Club Prosperine is owned and run by Dellin 
Sorth, asmarmy, fawning, weasel of aman fromthe 
Prosperine social class. He also serves as CEO of 
Prosperine Entertainment and Distilleries. 


The Imperial Resistance 


With cells located in the cities of Algarine, 
Tivin, Kaul, and Tauve, the Imperial Resistanceis 
well-entrenched on Algara. Currently, the Resis- 
tance numbers 69,000 members, of which 40,000 
are Xan and 29,000 are Algarians. The vast major- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


À 
Mike Vilardi 


Algara Il 


— ST 
-WA 


ALGARA II DIAGRAM 
Club Prosperine 


Electric Power Fence Stadium 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
-l 


Casinos Cabaret Arena 


ie a 


Cantinas 


Electronic Games 


Botanical 
Gardens 


ity of the Resistance members hold normal jobs 
based upon their various social classifications. 
The Resistance is made up mostly of Talents, 
Drones, Domestics and some Flotsam. 

Both Human and Xan Resistance members 
participate in attacks on symbols of the existing 
system. The Resistance goes out ofits way not to 
injure innocents, meaning anyone who is not a 
Bureaucrat or a Belligerent. Targets of sabotage 
haveincluded the robotic-driven industrial plants, 
the monorail to Club Prosperine, and military 
installations. 

The Resistance often sends pirate broadcasts 
out to the populace, encouraging them to rise up 
and revolt. Unflattering anti-Bureaucratic graffiti 
finds its way on to prominent walls inthe starport, 
for all off-worlders to see. 

Cells of Resistance members meet in secret 
locations in their respective cities. A city may 
have up to 50 cells — Algarine has 220. Most of 
the time, the members of one cell do not know the 
others, for the sake of security. 

The Algarian Bureaucracy has labelled the 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Sorth's Mansion 


SP A a nl 


a 


Health Club 


< Administration 


Building 


A 
A| Restaurants 


Resistance “pro-lmperial terrorists,” and to a 
great extent, this descriptionis apt. Butthesimple 
truth is that the Resistance has the right idea 
about the problems on Algara, but are looking to 
the wrong side for help. The government, mean- 
while, is backing the right side, but for all the 
wrong reasons. The Algarians have embraced 
the New Republic because it lets them run the 
planet the way they want to. Despite the fact that 
their Bureaucracy crushes the people intoastate 
of near- helplessness, they are intelligent enough 
to know that if the Empire moved in, the social 
structure would crumble, and all their privileges 
would be lost. 

Both the Imperials and the New Republic re- 
main unaware of the existence of the Imperial 
Resistance on Algara. 

The Imperial Resistance is run by an ex-Bellig- 
erent, Onstruk Don, who has grown weary of the 
class system on Alagara. Angered by the way the 
Xan were treated, he made an effort to win their 
trust and has trained many of them to the point 
where they are a marginally effective guerilla 


Cathleen Hunter 


force. (The Bureaucracy’s official announcement 
was that Don was kidnapped by the Resistance 
and is being held hostage.) 


Onstruk Don, 

Leader of the Imperial Resistance 

Species: Human 

Height: 1.7 meters Sex: Male 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 6D, blaster rifle 5D, dodge 6D, 

melee 7D 

KNOWLEDGE 7D 

Algarian history 8D, streetwise 9D, 

technology 7D+2 

MECHANICAL 5D 

Repulsorlift ops 7D+1 

PERCEPTION 6D 

Bargain 6D+1, command 9D, con 7D, hide/ 

sneak 8D, search 7D 

STRENGTH 3D+1 

Stamina 4D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 4D, 

demolition 8D, Droid programming/repair 

4D+1, medicine 5D, security 7D 

Description: Don is a solidly-built man with 
silver hair, and a few wrinkles. His eyes are icy 
blue, and his jaw is square and firm. 

Goals: To overthrow the Bureaucracy and 
bring the Empire to Algara. 

Background: Onstruk was a Belligerent, en- 
listing as an officer and rising through the ranks 
toachieve therank of colonel. He grew disgusted 
with the rigid social system and the injustice 
shown to the Xan, thus he arranged his own 
disappearance, contacted the scattered and dis- 
organized Resistance, and eventually brought 
them together into an effective unit. 

Personality: Onstruk Don is a man of compas- 
sion with a hunger for justice. He is a brilliant 
tactician, and an expert in demolitions. His ha- 
tred of the Bureaucracy and passion for change 
on Algara have combined to blind him to the true 
evil of the Empire. 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D damage), 
comlink, vibroblade (damage Str+1D+2), comlink, 
medpac, pocket computer, explosive charges, 
standard detonators, glow rod 

Quote: “The slackness of the New Republic is 
responsible for the terrible conditions on Algara. 
| hope to change that, and bring the discipline 
and classless society of the Empire to this place!” 


Warns 


Dhislugs 

DEXTERITY 3D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Hide/sneak 3D 

STRENGTH 7D 

Speed Code: 2D (crawling) 

Size: 3 meters in length 

Scale: Creature 

Armor: 1D to Strength (melee attacks 

only) 
Attacks: 
Acid: 5D damage per round 
Crush: 7D damage, moderate difficulty 

Combat: Dhislugs attack by wrapping them- 
selves around their prey and either crushing it to 
death or burning it with the acid they secrete 
from special glands. If the dhislug exceeds the 
difficulty of an attack by two levels (scoring a 
Very Difficult success in a Moderate task), it has 
succeeded in wrapping itself around its victim. 
Escaping its clutches if a Very Difficult Strength 
task. The dhislug will then begin secreting acid, 
doing 5D damage per round until its prey dies. 

Using Dhislugs in the Roleplaying Game: 
Algara’s urban areas — specifically, their under- 
ground waste disposal systems — have become 
the home to a particularly rapacious predator, 
called the dhislug. Thus far, its victims have been 
primarily Xan living in the poorer areas, limiting 
the amount of attention the Algaran government 
has paid to the problem. However, a Bureau of 
Terrestrial Gastropod Mollusk Research has been 
formed to study the problem. 

Dhislugs are huge, slimy creatures, with twin 
antennae on their heads that act as primary 
sensory organs — their eyes are largely useless 
from years spent in the dark. Their sole other 
“facial” feature is a toothless maw. Dhislugs can 
grow to a length of four meters, although most 
are in the three meter range. 

Dhislugs enjoy damp, dark areas. They congre- 
gate in colonies of up to 10 in the sewers and waste 
disposal pits of Algarine and other cities. They 
emerge only at night, using acid secretions to melt 
their way through gratings. They will rarely ven- 
ture far from these openings, crushing the first 
prey they spot and dragging it down fora feast. The 
Bureaucrats have blamed the damaged sewer ac- 
cesses on everything from natural erosion to ter- 
rorist activity by the Imperial Resistance. 

Dhislugs need to feed at least once a week to 
remain healthy. They are strict meat-eaters, but 
not picky, attacking any creature nearby. Whilenot 
armored, their body’s natural resilience does pro- 
vide some protection against melee weapons. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


-WA 


Adventure idea 


The New Republic hires the characters to run 
some data to Algara Il. This simple hook gets the 
characters to the planet. The New Republic will 
warn the characters to make sure that their 
diskwork is in order. 

At some point after the characters’ ship has 
landed but before they disembark, the Imperial 
Resistance, which has found out about the data 
shipment, will raid the vessel and try to steal the 
information. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are supposed to meet a fellow 
off-worlder New Republic representative at the 
New Republic Cantina in Algarine. As the charac- 
ters approach the cantina, their contact staggers 
out of an ally and collapses at their feet, dead. 

The characters only have a few minutes to 
search his body before the police arrive and, of 
course, the characters will have to answer lots of 
questions if they are found by the body. 

The victim died of a vibroblade wound. There is 


nothing on his person except his Visitor Identifica- 
tion chip, which indicates that he was staying at the 
Club Prosperine and that he owned a Droid. 

When they arrive at the club and check out his 
room, they find a group of Xan and humans going 
through theroom, searching for something. What 
has happened is that the New Republic represen- 
tative has been conducting his own investigation 
and has discovered the true nature of the situa- 
tion on this planet. He recorded it all on his 3P0 
Protocol Droid. The Imperial Resistance thought 
he was a spy and had him killed. They are now 
searching his room for the data he gathered, 
believing it to be incriminating evidence against 
their movement. 

The Droid, in the meantime, has taken the 
monorail back to the Algarine starport, awaiting 
the passenger ship that the agent had booked 
passage on in order to leave the planet. 

The ideal outcome of this adventure is the 
characters’ finding out the true nature of the 
Resistance, while not getting killed by them, as 
well as avoiding arrest for the agent’s murder. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


11 


System Summary 


The yellow star Kattellyn has only two planets 
in its system — sadly, both are dead. Kronas is a 
ball of searing rock that orbits much too close to 
the sun to ever sustain even the tiniest shred of 
life. Atraken is a bombed-out husk, a poisoned 
legacy of the Clone Wars. 

Atraken has three moons, Trilos, Doulos, and 
Mrykos. Only Trilos is capable of sustaining life 
of any kind, and it is here that an Atrakenite 
mining colony was set up several years before 
the Clone Wars erupted. Atrakenite refugees 
made their way here and have bolstered the 
population to its current level. 

The Kattellyn system is on a well-travelled 
trade route, but the disaster of Atraken is com- 
mon knowledge to most spacefarers. Knowing 
the details of the catastrophe is an Easy cultures 
task. Those traders who have, largely by acci- 
dent, discovered the Atraken settlements on 
Trilos have seen their tales dismissed as fantasy 
in other parts of the galaxy. 


Atrakenite Society 


This is a survivor-based society, a society 
built on a sadness that has not yet gone away. 
This, combined with the stark and gloomy set- 
ting of Trilos, makes for a somber people that 
seem to have little time for leisure or laughter. 

The Atrakenites are a stubborn lot, and they 
have chosen as one people to stay in their system 
and try to honor the memory of their dead by 
rebuilding their society. In a way, it is a form of 
penance. Many of the refugees are still suffering 
from survivor’s guilt. 


System Datafile 


Kattellyn system, star: Kattellyn, yellow sun. Two plan- 
ets, Kronas and Atraken. Atrakenite mining colony on 
Trilos, primary Atrakenite moon. 

ALERT: RESTRICTED SYSTEM! The population of the 


planet Atraken was decimated during the Clone Wars. 
There is no one left on the planet to trade or interact with. 
Possible hazards include biochemical weaponry residue, 
unexploded ammunition, and other sustained environ- 
mental hazards. This system is dead and off-limits to all 
personnel. 


Thereis only one distinction madein Atrakenite 
society, that which exists between the descen- 
dants of the miners and the descendants of the 
original refugees. Neither group has dominance 
over the other, and marriages and the like are 
certainly permitted between the two. The 
Atrakenites maintain the largely ceremonial divi- 
sion simply as away to remember their heritage 
and to keep their history alive. 

The professional organization called the 
Atrakenite Guild of Miners runs the day-to-day 
affairs of the planetoid. When the refugees first 
came to Trilos, it made sense that the miners 
were the ones to set up a functioning govern- 
ment, since it was they who knew the planetoid 
well. The organization is headed by an eight- 
member Mining Council, which consists of the 
descendants of six mining families and two refu- 
gee families. 

The destruction of their planet has given the 
Atrakenites a strong streak of non-violence. They 
have become outright pacifists and will not at- 
tack another creature unless their lives are di- 
rectly threatened and there is no other alterna- 
tive available. Some of the traders who have 
landed on Trilos and spoken about the Empire- 
New Republic conflict have been surprised by 
the Atrakenite reaction. The Atrakenites do not 
want anything to do with either side. They do not 
care who runs the galaxy as long as they can be 
left in peace and allowed to rebuild their own 
shattered lives. 


Starport Touchdown 


This is a limited services starport, formerly 
used as the main starport in the pre-Clone War 
days. Now, it lies mostly unused. Most of the 
spacecraft used to evacuate Atrakenite survi- 
vors have been disassembled, and only two craft 
remain. 

The two surviving craft are light freighters, the 
Atraken Hope and the Afraken Memory. Only the 
Atraken Memory still functions, while the Atraken 
Hope is now used for spare parts to keep the 
freighter working. Unfortunately, the Atraken 
Memory is currently under repair. 

One interesting bit of salvage from post-Clone 
War days that drifted into the system was the 
battered hulk of an X-wing fighter, obviously 
battle-damaged as a result of a run-in with Impe- 
rial forces. Though the pilot was dead, the R2 


12 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Satellite 


Gravity: Light 

Terrain: Caves, mountains, craters 
Length of Day: 20 Standard Hours 
Length of Year: 340 Local Days 
Sapient Species: Human, Ee (N) 

Points of Interest: Ee colony, Old Mine, 


SYSTEM DATA 
System Name: Kattellyn 


Star Name: Kattellyn Star Type: Yellow 
ORBITAL BODIES 
Planet Type 
Desolate Searing Rock 
Atraken Desolate Wasteland 
Torilos (Moon) | Barren Mining Satellite 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


gs Eastern 
as Hemisphere 


Z$: New Atraken 


> Western 
Hemisphere 


World Summary 

The planet Atraken is the primary world of this 
system. Atraken is a wasteland, ravaged by the Clone 
Wars to the point of irreparable ecological disaster. 
The planet has been totally written off the world logs 
as a place for visitors to travel and trade. 

However, what the overwhelming majority of the 
galaxy is unaware of is that a small segment of the 
Atraken population escaped the conflict and fled by 
ship to Trilos, one of the three moons of Atraken. 

Now miners and colonists dwell in pressurized 
shelters above and below ground. Most of the ores 
they mine are processed on the planetoid itself and 
used to expand the colony. In essence, it is a self- 
sustaining world. 

Standing water is found in underground springs, 
and massive hydroponic and fungal gardens provide 
nutrients. 

The Atrakenites have, in the last few years, begun 
making salvage runs back to their home world. 


13 


Stephen Crane 


ee a, | 


14 


Droid still functioned. Using their resourceful- 
ness, and dumping the memory banks of the R2, 
the Atrakenites have managed to build other R2 
units. 

The X-wing now sits on the runway of the 
starport, unable to be completely repaired due 
to the lack of certain key parts. The Atrakenites 
are willing to trade it for needed goods, but the 
value of what is offered must equal at least half of 
the price of an X- wing. 

In order to repair the X-wing, the characters 
need to purchase spare parts found only at Stel- 
lar class starports and costing 50,000 credits. 
Once this is achieved, repairing the ship takes 
two weeks and is a Difficult task. 


New Atraken City 


The word “city” is a slight misnomer, as the 
population of New Atraken hardly qualifies the 
site for such a classification. It is located half a 
kilometer below the lunar surfaceand connected 
by access paths to the starport. 

It was, at one time, a tiny community, popu- 
lated by miners and their families. Once the 
refugees from Atraken arrived, the little mining 
village had to be expanded to fit everyone. Cur- 
rent population stands at 40,000. 

The city has two cantinas, the Last Resort and 
the Downside. There are no hotels, casinos, or 
restaurants here. The cantinas are the only places 


ARS 


where the people of Atraken/Trilos can go to 
rest, drink, and exchange news. 

The citizens of New Atraken City live in modu- 
lar apartments grouped together in building con- 
figurations. 

The city is connected by a subway to the Old 
Mine. The trip takes two hours, and atrain leaves 
every hour on the hour. The subway is double- 
tracked, so that trains going back and forth 
present no problem. There are no other stops on 
the route. 


Current Mines 


The Atrakenites have begun new mines. Each 
oneis setin one ofthe big craters in the planetoid’s 
western hemisphere. Travel to these mines is 
accomplished using pressurized landspeeders 
and ore barges. 

Each mine has a pressurized dome with sleep- 
ing facilities for 180 workers. The mines are very 
productive, and there are even plans for expand- 
ing the subway to reach each of them, once 
enough raw material has been mined, refined, 
and made ready to use. 


The Old Mine 


Located one kilometer below the surface, this 
huge cavern (10 kilometers long by six kilometers 
wide) was the first mine established by Atraken. It 
has since been played out, and now houses the 


ATRAKEN DIAGRAM 
New Atraken City 


New Atraken City 


The Old Mine 
(cavern 10km by 6km) 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Cathleen Hunter 


—STA 
-WA 


Atrakenites’ manufacturing equipment. 

The Old Mine also hosts a community now, 
composed of the laborers charged with con- 
structing most of the goods. Current Old Mine 
population is 10,000. The community has one 
cantina, also called the “Old Mine.” 


The Ee 


The Ee are a race of small worms native to 
Trilos, not more than six centimeters in length. 
Ee coloration is grey or tan, with a darkened area 
marking the location of their heads. The moon 
Trilos is infested with Ee, who enjoy burrowing 
through the rock and eating very small amounts 
of minerals and fungus. The cold, harsh condi- 
tions of space do not bother the Ee, and they are 
able to exist with very little oxygen. 

Ee have tactile, olfactory, and audio nerve end- 
ings all over their bodies serving as sensory or- 
gans. The head contains one optical organ that 
allows sight. Their tiny mouths have a sharply 
defined taste organ, so that the burrowing Ee may 
be able to tell what sort of mineral it is burrowing 
through. Some Ee have even become connoisseurs 
of particular minerals. 

The Ee have two unusual abilities. The first is 
that their digestive system allows them to ingest 
several different types of mineral and rock, and 
produce alloys. These substances are used in the 
construction of Ee equipment (see below). Also, 
when an Ee eats into a vein of metal ore, it refines 
the metal toits purest form, since what it is really 
consuming from the ore are the impurities. The Ee 
then take the threads of pure ore and, using their 
mental powers, weave and weld the metals into 
functioning devices. Most of these devices are 
powered by solar power, collected by micropanels 
on Trilos’ surface and stored in micropowercells, 
all of which are formed by the Ee manufacturing 
process. The Ee have also found that ingesting 
certain chemicals allows them to produce different 
substances from the minerals they take in, but they 
are forced to rely on the unwitting Atrakenites to 
provide the needed solutions. 

One of the most unusual things about the Ee is 
their mental prowess. The species is quite intel- 
ligent and has developed a number of powers of 
the mind to enable them to rise to a level of 
civilization unheard of for most invertebrates. 

Each Ee has male and female characteristics, 
and reproduces by laying 1D eggs. The incuba- 
tion period is a time-consuming, random affair, 
with the young taking 2D months to form. Aver- 
age Ee life expectancy is 20 years. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Ee Society 

The Ee are individuals but have a linked group 
mind, and consequently the issue of government 
is asimple one. Each Ee puts its thoughts into the 
problem, and the course of action which results 
is an amalgam ofall the ideas submitted. Despite 
this potentially confusing system, the Ee manage 
to get things accomplished. 

Ee dwellings consist of hives made of cone- 
shaped rock formations, found on the moon’s 
surface as well as in underground caves. 

Ee society is divided into the following catego- 
ries, based on occupation: 

Purifiers: Those Ee especially adept at pro- 
cessing ore into pure elemental form. 

Weavers: Ee who show talent in taking the 
processed materials and forming them into the 
machinery needed. 

Thinkers: Ee who have a knack for theories, 
principles, and such. 

Mindbenders: Ee who have especially strong 
mental talents. 

Bulwarks: Ee whose primary duties involve 
the protection of the race. 

None of these castes is considered superior to 
any other., but exist only to make the best use of 


Rob Casweil 


Atraken SES Oh A Weer 
eee eee 


16 


every Ee’s talent. 

The Ee have no spoken language. They do 
possess an icongraphic alphabet, which uses 
symbols to represent words and ideas, but this 
system is only rarely used. Most of the time, the 
Ee rely on their telepathic power to communi- 
cate with each other and with aliens. 

The Atrakenites have not discovered the true 
nature of the Ee. They are aware that Trilos has 
some forms of life, including these worms, but 
they are not aware that they are sharing the 
world with another civilization. 

As for the Ee, they have been watching the 
Atrakenites very closely, reading their minds, 
and observing their behavior. The Ee feel pity for 
the Atrakenites, who have lost their home planet. 
The little creatures are waiting for the group 
mind to finally decide when the time is right for 
contact. Many Ee feel that this will be soon. 

Until then, special measures are taken to en- 
sure that the Atrakenites never learn of the Ee 
civilization. Ee iconography is never done in a 
place where the Atrakenites are known to pass 
by or frequent. The minds of traders who stop at 
Trilos are manipulated by the Ee so that their 
tales of the planet are so fantastic as to not be 
believed. 

The Ee have learned of the existence of the 
Empire-New Republic civil war. The Ee came to 


Length: 1.0 - 6.5 centimeters 
DEXTERITY 0D PERCEPTION 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D STRENGTH 1 
MECHANICAL 1D TECHNICAL 5D 


Speed Code: 4D (burrowing) 

Special Abilities: The Ee have three dis- 
tinct types of mental ability, physical skills, 
mental skills, and environmental skills. Ee start 
out with their respective skills at 2D — skills 
may be increased at double the normal skill 
cost (for instance, going from 4D to 4D+1 costs 
8 skill points). See “Ee Mental Powers,” begin- 
ning on page 17. 

Combat: The Ee rely on their mental pow- 
ers in battle, having little in the way of physical 
skills. 

Using Ee in the Roleplaying Game: The Ee 
are small and fragile, but with formidable men- 
tal powers and great knowledge. They do their 
best not to get into any physical confronta- 
tions whatsoever, firmly believing that discre- 


ARS 


the conclusion, rather quickly, that the Empireis 
the prime offender. The Ee also feel that if the 
Empire were to find out about this mining facility, 
it would move in, brutally taking everything it 
wished and turning it into an Imperial production 
facility. This is another reason why they feel it 
necessary to remain hidden, although many of 
the species are bothered by toying with alien 
memories. 


Ee Mental Powers 


All Ee are adept at at least one type of mental 
power, beit physical skills, environmental skills, or 
mental skills. One Ee in 10 is adept at two catego- 
ries, and one Ee in 100 is adept at all three. 

Ee begin with 2D in these skills, but mayincrease 
their skills. Effective range of all powers, unless 
otherwise stated, is five meters. 

Physical Skills 

Cell Burst: Disrupts the cells in organic or inor- 
ganic matter, causing 4D damage. Difficulty is Easy 
for organic matter and Moderate for inorganic 
matter. 

Healing: Completely removes an injury. Diffi- 
culty: Very Easy for wounded victims, Easy for 
incapacitated ones, and Difficult for mortally 
wounded ones. Note: These difficulties are 
DOUBLED when the target is non-Ee. 

Pliability: Causes any substance to become 


tion is the better part of valor. They would 
rather out-think their opponents than outfight 
them. 

The Ee do not seek to inflict harm on others, 
concentrating mostly on defending themselves 
and innocents. But, if pressed, and there are 
no other options available, they will use their 
mental powers to harm. 

If the Ee have any flaw, it is their egos, which 
are far larger than their bodies. An Ee looks 
down upon anyone not as intelligent as him- 
self. They have little patience when it comes to 
explaining difficult procedures to beings of 
lesser intelligence. 

The Ee are natural explorers, and have 
mapped every section of Trilos. There is no 
doubt that the Ee would jump at the chance to 
explore space. 

Quote: “Yes, yes, | know you are not a 
segmented-bodied, telepathic invertebrate. | 
guess we cannot all be perfect!” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


—S5TA 
-WA 


flexible. Difficulty: Easy. 

Telekinesis: Though Ee telekinesis is different 
than the Force power of the same name, for 
simplicity’s sake, the same description can be used 
for both. Ee difficulty numbers of telekinesis are 
two levels higher than those of the Force power. 

Teleportation: Ee with this power can teleport 
objects which weigh no more than one kilogram. 
The object can be teleported one meter per three 
points rolled (round down). For example, if a 15 
is rolled, Ee can teleport an object up to five 
meters. If the power user attempts to teleport 
himself, difficulty is Moderate. Standard diffi- 
culty: Very Easy. 

Environmental Skills 

Light: This power must be centered on an 
object weighing no more than one kilogram. The 
object must be within 10 meters of the Ee. When 
used successfully, a globe of light 10 meters in 
diameter is created. The object can be moved 
and the light globe will move with it. Difficulty: 
Very Easy. 

Null Gravity: An Ee interference field disrupts 
the gravity in a two-meter radius. Anyone caught 
in it, floats upward until the Ee ceases using the 
power. The Ee must be on the perimeter of the 
radius, and the null gravity area cannot be moved. 
Difficulty: Easy. 

Power Drain: Sucks all power out of a battery 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


or other charge-holding device. Difficulty: Mod- 
erate. 

Raise/Lower Temperature: Affects a 20-meter 
diameter circle. Difficulty is Very Easy for a five 
degree Centigrade change, Easy for a 10-degree 
change, Moderate for a 15-degree change, etc. 


Mental Skills 

Group Mind: Enables all Ee to communicate 
with each other. All involved Ee must be within 30 
meters of each other (Ee normally form a “chain” 
to keep in contact). Difficulty: Very Easy. 

Memory Alteration: Rearranges the memory 
patterns of the victim. The Ee’s power roll must 
exceed the victim's Perception roll. Ee use this 
power to change the memories of aliens, so that 
they tell outlandish, and easily dismissed, sto- 
ries about Trilos. 

Mindlink: Allows two-way mental communi- 
cation, even if recipient has no mental powers. 
Difficulty: Moderate. 

Projective Telepathy: This is somewhat simi- 
lar to the Force power, with the difficulty Easy, or 
Moderate if the target is in an extremely emo- 
tional state. 

Sensory Overload: Causes the target to expe- 
rience a huge influx of sight, sound, taste, hear- 
ing, and touch stimuli, causing him to pass out. 
Difficulty based on victim’s Perception: 1D-2D: 


Mike Vilardi 


Very Easy; 3D4D: Easy; 5D-6D: Moderate; 7D+: 
Difficult. 


The effects of memory alteration, cell burst, 
power drain and healing remain even after the 
power is no longer being used. 

Whenever an Ee uses a mental power, it must 
rest for twice the amount of time spent perform- 
ing that action. The maximum amount of time an 
Ee can spend using a mental power is one hour. 


Ee Technology 


The Ee have developed and continue to manu- 
facture the following items: solar panels, intruder 
sensors, motion sensitive alarms, lighting pan- 
els, fortifications for their dwellings and sup- 
ports for tunnels 

All ofthis machinery is, of course, to scale with 
the Ee race and of no use to the average visitor. 


The World of Atraken 


The once-beautiful planet of Atraken now 
stands as a monument to mindless destruction. 
Opposing forces in the Clone Wars made it their 
battlefield, destroying each other, the planet's 
environment, and over 90 percent of the native 
population. 

Nowadays, Atraken’s oceans, those that have 
not been boiled away, are huge bodies of poison- 
ous water. Most plant life has been blasted away, 


and all animal life is gone. The very air is poison- 
ous, carrying either the remains of chemical 
weapons or virulent strains left over from germ 
warfare. The only life form that remains are large, 
burrowing insects called “diehards” that have 
adapted to eating the poisons of Atraken. 

All that stands now are the shattered remains 
of Atraken’s cities and a carpet of debris, the last 
bits of evidence that a thriving civilization once 
existed here. 


Exploring Atraken 

The only legitimate reason for exploring 
Atraken is for purposes of salvage. In order to 
survive for any length of time on that blasted 
planet, full protection space suits will be needed. 
Even these, however, are not enough — the 
howling winds of Atraken, laced with corrosive 
chemicals, will slowly cause a suit to lose its 
structural integrity, eating away at the non-metal 
parts. 

In game terms, consider the suit to have a 
Strength of 5D for purposes of protection from the 
hostile environment of Atraken. For each hour 
spent on Atraken, acumulative 1Dis rolled against 
the suit. As soon as a wound result is scored, the 
suit has lost integrity, and the character is vul- 
nerable. 

Once a suit is compromised, the character is 
attacked by a cumulative 2D damage for every 


Ww 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Mike Vilardi 


ten minutes of exposure. 

Visibility on most parts of the planet is down 
to 20 meters. Dust and other pollutants in the 
atmosphere obscure sunlight. Daytime tempera- 
ture hovers at about two degrees Celsius, while 
nighttime temperatures dip to minus ten degrees 
Celsius. 


Atraken Events 


For every half hour spent on Atraken, roll 2D 
and consult the “Atraken Hazards Table” to see 
what peril, if any, the characters encounter. 

Storms last for 6D minutes. It is possible to 
have overlapping conditions. 


Searching for Salvage 


Characters exploring Atraken may attempt to 
salvage materials. Each character may attempt 
to find salvage once per hour. For each character 
attempting such an action, roll 2D and consult 
the“ Salvage Table” for the results. 


Cidwen 

DEXTERITY 5D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

STRENGTH 1D +1 

Speed Code: 5D (flying), 4D (gliding) 

Size: .5 meters in length, l-meter 

wingspan 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Beak: Str+2D damage 
Claws: 4D damage 

Combat: Cidwens attack from the air. If their 
prey is relatively small — a diehard, for instance 
— they will attempt to seize it in their claws and 
carry it off before consuming it. If faced with a 
large target, they will fly past and rake it with 
their claws until it is unconscious. They will then 
land and tear it to pieces. 

Using Cidwen in the Roleplaying Game: There 
are, in reality, very few cidwen on Atraken— no 
more than a dozen at present. They are actually 
natives of the planet Keros, some light years 
away, and a pair were left behind by a free-trader. 
Shortly after, the Atrakenities discovered that 
the cidwen, while potentially dangerous, have 
developed an appetite for diehards. 

Cidwen are ebon-hued birds with sharp beaks 
and vicious claws. They nestin ruins throughout 
Atraken. Their keen eyes allow them to spot 
diehard activity from a distance, at which point 
they take to the air and snatch up the offending 
insects. 

Though cidwen are capable of flight, they 
often glide when stalking prey, as there is less 
chance of their being heard. Should a cidwen's 


Atraken Hazards Table 
Encounter 


2-5 No encounter. 

6-7 Massive dust storm. Visibility cut to five 
meters. -1D to all Perception and Dexterity- 
related skills. 

8 Ground collapses underneath 1D character’s 
feet. Roll for falling damage. Total distance 
fallen equals 3D. 


9 Characters come upon a fairly intact building. 

10 Electrical storm prevents communication and 
sensor operation. 

11 Characters encounter 1D diehards. 

12 High radiation area. All characters hit by 4D 


of radiation damage, regardless of protection. 


Salvage Table 


Roll Result 
2-6 Nothing. 
7-8 Useful spare parts for Droids. 
9 Useful spare parts for spaceships. 
10 One random piece of broken 
equipment, gamemaster’s choice*. 
11 One random broken weapon, GM 
choice*. 


A broken landspeeder**, 


*Recommend that only two such items be 
found by any one party of characters. Can 
be repaired, Very Difficult task. 


** Recommend that only one such item be 
found by any one party of characters, and 
only once. Can be repaired, Very Difficult 
task. 


nest be disturbed, or the creature simply be 
hungry or irritated, it may attack people. This 
generally involves gliding down and clawing. 
There has only been one recorded instance of 
cidwen eating a person, they are generally more 
interested in driving away the offending party. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


19 


Diehards 


DEXTERITY 5D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 6D 

Speed Code: 4D 

Armor: +2D to Strength 

Note: Energy weapons are less effective 

against Diehards. When attacked, add 3D 

to their Strength to resist damage. 

Size: .5 meters long 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Mandibles: 4D damage 

Combat: Diehards burrow up from under- 
neath rubble and attack their victims. They 
are aggressive hunters, who have had to sub- 
sist for far too long on minerals and old build- 
ing materials. 

Using Diehards in The Roleplaying Game: 
Diehards are bugs, which have survived the 
catastrophe not because of their wits, but sim- 
ply because of their physiology. The diehards 
were unafiected by the various plagues, radia- 
tion, and energy weapons used in the war. 

In fact, in order to kill diehards, characters 


Adventure Idea 


This should be the first adventure set in the 
Kattelyn system. 

The characters spot a Corellian stock light 
freighter adrift in space. It does not answer any 
hails. If the characters board it (gamemasters can 
use the interior blueprint of the Millennium Falcon 
found on pages 40-41 of the Star Wars Sourcebook), 
they will find that the crew of four is dead. 

The ship appears to be ruined, as if vandals 
tore into it with vibroaxes. None of the systems 
save the computer and the environmental con- 
trol still work, and even these will go in 1D hours. 

This is what happened: The freighter Lucky 
Bantha discovered the Kattelyn star system, The 
crew stopped off at Trilos, exchanged some small 
goods and pleasantries, then, against the advice 
of the Atrakenites, went to check the ruined 
planet of Atraken for salvage. 

Unfortunately, the crew did two things wrong. 
First of all, their space suits were of cheap qual- 
ity, and easily compromised. This led to their 
catching radiation sickness, which eventually 
caused their deaths. Secondly, they DID find 
some salvage, unaware that a small nest of die- 
hards was included with it. 


must use explosives, melee weapons, kinetic 
energy weapons (slugthrowers, bows), or light 
sabers. Diehards are very resistant to energy 
attacks. 

Diehards are driven by instinct. They are 
not intelligent and do not use complicated 
strategy. Instead, they swarm all over their 
prey and bring it down by force of numbers. 

Once a diehard hits a target, it remains 
fastened to the victim by means of its man- 
dibles. After the first successful attack by a 
diehard, that particular insect will automati- 
cally hit in subsequent rounds, doing an addi- 
tional 2D of damage. Removing a diehard is a 
Moderate Strength task. 

The Atrakenites nicknamed this species of 
insect “diehards” due to their ability to sur- 
vive the devastation of the planet. The die- 
hards are ten-legged insects with a chitinous 
shell on their backs, and nasty mandibles. The 
are encountered in groups of 2D-1. 

Diehards can also be found on Trilos, having 
travelled there on Atrakenite salvage ships. 


When the crew brought the salvage into their 
cargo hold, the diehards left the salvage and 
began eating away at the ship itself. Of course, 
the crew was already dead of radiation poisoning 
by the time the diehards had managed any sig- 
nificant damage. 

The names of the ship and crew, their last 
port-of-call and its coordinates, their next planned 
destination, their activities on Atraken, and their 
final entry, are all on the ship’s computer. It is a 
Moderate computer programming/repair task to 
obtain each of the above listed bits of informa- 
tion out of the computer. 

The dead crew members, incidentally, are still 
irradiated. Unless the bodies are jettisoned, the 
characters will suffer 3D of radiation per hour 
spent in the Lucky Bantha. 


Adventure idea 


Once on Trilos and acquainted with the na- 
tives, the characters are asked to investigate 
some odd goings-on in the Old Mine. Large 
amounts of chemicals used in manufacturing are 
missing, and all evidence points to the theft 
being an inside job. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


— T AR raken 
ee aaa 


-WA 


This curious event is the work of a few ambi- 
tious Ee, who are defying their group mind and 
using their powers to get the Atrakenites to pro- 
duce large quantities of chemicals for their use. 
They alter the memories of the Atrakenites so 
that they do not recall mixing the solutions. 

There are a few small Ee tracks in the dust, 
which can be found with a Very Difficult Percep- 
tion task. The tracks lead to a cone, which is the 
entryway down into a five meter wide cavern, 
where the Ee have a small city. 

The Ee will not wish to be revealed to the 
Atrakenites. It will be rather interesting to see 
how the characters react to telepathic worms 
who are living refineries. 


Adventure Idea 


While the characters are on another planet, 
they are approached by a somber-looking eld- 
erly couple. They offer to pay the characters 
50,000 credits to fly them to the Kattelyn system. 

The old couple know of the fate which befell 
Atraken. They are the children of two refugee 
families who fled the planet before the war broke 
out. Now, in their declining years, the old couple 
wish to go back and see their homeworld one last 
time before they die. 

The couple are unaware of the existence of the 
Trilos colony. The characters are unware that 


the couple are New Republic sympathizers who 
are being followed by Imperial agents. A confron- 
tation on Atraken between the Imperials and the 
characters may be called for. 

For gamemasters and players who like happy 
endings, add the following wrinkle: the old couple 
doesn’t know it, but they have relatives still alive 
on the mining colony. 


Adventure Idea 


In the realm of the truly off-beat, an Ee ap- 
proaches the party in a cantina (perhaps after 
the party has drunk a bit too much), and asks 
them to take it tothe moon Trilos in the Kattelynn 
system. For payment, the Ee can give the charac- 
ters 5,000 credits worth of pure metals, but can 
only pay this price once it gets back to Trilos. 

It seems that a free-trader who visited Trilos 
wound up with an Ee in his spacesuit. The curi- 
ous Ee wanted to see “what was out there,” but 
has seen enough. 

What could make this adventure even MORE 
unusual is having a horde of half-drunk aliens 
who love worms as a delicacy, or for putting in 
their drinks, notice the Ee talking to the charac- 
ters. The drunken aliens will give chase to the 
characters, demanding the worm. Of course, the 
aliens have their own ship (or ships), too. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


21 


Carosi XII 


Carosi XII 


System Summary 


The Carosus system has undergone some dra- 
matic changes in the recent past. Three hundred 
years ago, the sun, Carosi, an orange star, reached 
the point where it had consumed most of its 
hydrogen and began an unusually rapid expan- 
sion. Carosite astronomers predicted that the 
sun would soon turn into a red giant, devouring 
most of the inner planets. 

The first five planets in the system were de- 
stroyed. Carosi IV, the Carosite home planet, was 
swallowed up by the sun. Carosi V, a prime 
candidate for colonization, was also destroyed. 
Carosi VI, a planet with potential forterraforming, 
is now the closest planet to the sun, and conse- 
quently has had any life-giving potential burned 
away. Carosi VII and VIII have rapidly turned into 
stiflingly hot greenhouses suitable for coloniza- 
tion at some later date, and Carosi IX, X, and XI 
are useless gas giants. Only Carosi XII, once a 
frozen ice ball and now improved to polar planet 
status, has a habitable environment. 

It was Carosi XII that the scientists spent de- 
cades terraforming in anticipation of coloniza- 
tion. The results have paid off, though the work 
is not yet complete. As a result, Carosi has a great 
need for scientists and other specialists inter- 
ested in building a world. 


Carosites 


The Carosites are a bipedal race, one and a 
half meters tall and quite thin, with unusually 
long necks. Their faces have long snouts, small 
dark eyes, and a fine layer of fur. This fur covers 


System Datafile 


Note: Update files to indicate new system status. Carosi is 
no longer an orange star, but is now a red giant. Please adjust 
star maps and navigational computations accordingly. 

Carosus star system, star: Carosi, red giant. Formerly 12 
planets in system, has been reduced to seven planets due 


to solar expansion. Old numerical reckoning retained; 
closest planet to sun is Carosi VI. 

Carosi XII, New Republic planet. Primary function: Medi- 
cal care and prosthetics. NOTE: If emergency medical care 
is required, radio Carosi XII starport on standard hailing 
frequencies. An emergency trauma team will be standing 


by. 


AR= 
ARS 


their bodies as well, and keeps them warm. Their 
senses are extremely acute, and their hands are 
very nimble and well coordinated. 

Carosites have a life expectancy of 120 stan- 
dard years. The Carosite reproductive cycle is a 
very fleeting thing. Carosites can only have young 
twice in their lifetime. Each birth produces a 
litter of 1D young. This accounts for the Carosite’s 
intense respect for life, since they have so few 
opportunities for renewal. It was this respect for 
life that helped the Carosites develop their amaz- 
ing medical talents, from which the entire galaxy 
now benefits. 

The only social unit in Carosite society is the 
family, consisting of an adult male, adult female, 
young, and any family member that is too old to 
take care of itself. 

Carosites are a gentle, beneficent race with a 
talent for healing and invention. They possess an 
instinctive grasp of alien physiologies, as well as 
aspecial insight into what ails a patient. Carosites 
are also hopeless optimists. 

Tradition and ritual are very important to the 
Carosites. The destruction of their home planet 
has served to strengthen their resolve to remem- 
ber and venerate the past. 

Verbal or written promises are regarded as 
completely binding by Carosites, and they ex- 
tend that courtesy to off-worlders, expecting 
visitors to the planet to reciprocate. Thus, 
Carosites are frequently disappointed by what 
they perceive as the dishonor prevalent among 
some other species. 

Though Carosites are more devoted to healing 
a body than harming it, they will vigorously fight 
to defend their homes, families, and planet. If a 
Carosite’s convalescing patients are being threat- 
ened, the Carosites on hand go into a berserk 
“life-saving fanaticism” state. This enables a 
Carosite to add 2D to their Strength dice for as 
long as the patient is endangered. 

Although the Carosites have the ability to 
engage in space exploration, they have chosen 
instead to devote their time, energy, resources, 
and intelligence to perfecting the medical arts. 
They use the Sudden Restoration, a Carosite space 
vessel that functions as a hospital ship, to spread 
their talents to needy systems. The Restoration 
travels the galaxy, bringing free medical care to 
all in need. The Restoration has also visited New 
Republic and neutral worlds in the aftermath of 
battles and administered care to the civilians. (In 


22 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


PLANET 


Planet Name 


Carosi XII 


Type: Terrestrial 
Temperature: Cool 
Atmosphere: Type | 


LOG 


Planet Profile 
Terraformed 


Hydrosphere: Moderate 


(a i oy 
PS ae eee 
Starport: Standard 


Government: Democracy 
Tech Level: Space 


Length of Day: 30 Standard Hours 


Terrain: Glaciers, mountain 


Greater 
Carosian 
Glacier 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Anti-Carosian 
Glacier 


Major Imports: Manufactured goods, food, luxury items 
SYSTEM DATA tw 
Anti-Carosian Western 
System Name: Carosus Glacier Hemisphere 
sects tad ae dicta Suni 

There are very few planets that have openly sup- 

ORBITAL BODIES ported first the Rebel Alliance and now the New 
[Names| Type __  _ |Moons) Republic; Carosi XII is one of them. Located far from 
|Carosivi | SearingRock = | o | the Imperial Core, but close to an important free- 
- trader route, the arctic planet is visited by many who 
| Carosi VII | Desolate Swamp | 1 | seek healing of the mind or body. Carosi XII is a safe 
haven for free-traders and New Republic agents alike, 
thanks to a Republic base established close to the 

| CarosiiXx | GasGiant | 6 | sole Carosite city. 
Carosi X Cease ë | 0) The topography of Carosi XII is made up mostly of 
> 7 mountains, stretches of open, frigid plains, and gi- 
Carosi XI gantic glaciers. The sole sea, the Avuae, provides a 
Carosi XII | CoolTerrestrial č | T )] terrestrial haven for the Carosites. The only city on 
t a A A the planet, Newlife Point, is located on the shores of 

the Avuae. 

The planet still has some latent volcanic activity, 
the most popular manifestation of this being the hot 
springs located south of Newlife Point. The springs 
are known for their soothing properties and are used 
to accelerate healing. 

The Carosites are the only intelligent race on 
Carosi XII. There are a few species of marine life and 
wildlife, but nothing of any great note. 

Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 23 


Stephen Crane 


Carosite 


general, the vessel avoids Imperial space, given 
the Empire’s long-standing policy of discrimina- 
tion against non-humans.) 

Since the ship aids anyone in need, the Resto- 
ration is generally safe from any attack. Many 
pirates and free-traders would take it upon them- 
selves to hunt down anyone who harmed the 
Restoration or its crew. 

A little known “side business” of the Carosites 
is their programming of medical Droids. Techni- 
cians on Carosi can “squeeze” the maximum 
performance out of medical Droids. Increasing a 
medical Droid’s existing programming while on 
Carosi XII takes half the required number of 
credits. 

The Carosites also enjoy teaching medicine, 
and have set up a school. Famous doctors, sur- 
geons, scientists, and other medical personnel 
come to Carosi XII to either study or teach. 


Carosi Society and History 


The Carosites as a race are still trying to find 
their bearings after the massive emigration to 
Carosi XII. The evacuation took a total of 20 
years, meaning that the Carosites landed on their 
new home roughly 200 years ago. Though the 
Carosites venerate and continue to observe their 
old customs and traditions, there is a fragment of 


Rob Caswell 


AR. 
ARS 


Carosites 


Height: 1.5 meters 

DEXTERITY 3D PERCEPTION 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D STRENGTH 2D 
MECHANICAL 1D TECHNICAL 4D 


Special Abilities: All Carosites begin with 
5D in medicine; life-saving fanaticism at- 
tack, +2D to Strength dice. 

Roleplaying Hints: Carosites are an hon- 
est, caring people. They will insist that an 
injured character receive treatment before 
continuing on his mission. They despise 
the war and anyone, on either side, who 
revels in killing. 

Quote: “That shoulder looks very bad. 
Your task can wait — sit down, this will only 
take a moment.” 


Carosite society that is pushing for new tradi- 
tions to go with their new home. This is a source 
of heated debate among the population. 

The other bone of contention has been pro- 
vided by a small but vocal segment of Carosites 
who call themselves “The Preventers.” They feel 
thattheir people must takeaggressive action against 
the weakened Empire, so that no more lives will be 
lost to the galactic conflict. The arguments on this 
subject are loud, emotional affairs. 

Once every 10 years, the Carosites elect one of 
their number to serve as the ultimate planetary 
authority. This leader is advised by a group of 11 
counsellors, chosen from the 11 most prominent 
families. 

Medical metaphors are very common in the 
Carosite language. Things suchas the state of the 
New Republic, the state of the planet, or a busi- 
ness deal are described in medical terms. For 
instance, a business deal that has taken some 
bad turns but may still be salvaged would be 
described as follows: “The business is ailing, but 
may be healed with proper treatment.” 

The Carosites are loyal to the New Republic, but 
events often lead them to treat Imperials or Impe- 
rial sympathizers. The Carosites regard every life 
as sacred and every private thought inviolate. The 
Carosites would never try to interrogate, brain- 
wash, or otherwise attempt to remove information 
from the minds of their patients. 


Carosites and the Force 
The existence of the Force is not disputed by 
the Carosites. They believe it exists, and they 
would like to learn more about it. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


— T AR CAOS X 
ay 


-WA 


There has never been a Carosite Jedi. Carosites 
are not interested so much in becoming Jedis or 
in learning everything there is to know about the 
Force. They merely wish to study the power so 
they may channel it into new ways of healing. 
This is not so unusual, since there are Carosites 
who are still engaged in trying to adapt blaster 
technology to healing. 


Medical Care 


‘All things considered, the promise of excellent 
medical care is still the thing which attracts 
people to Carosi XII. The Carosites charge their 
patients an amount commensurate with their 
ability to pay. 

A tricky area is the realm of prosthetics and 
cybernetics. Prosthetics are units used to replace 
damaged or lost limbs and organs. These units do 
not improve upon what was lost, they merely 
replace it with an artificial replica that can perform 
its function adequately. Carosites refuse to install 
cybernetic enhancements, however. 

As a result, if someone wishes to have cyber- 
netic enhancements installed, the Carosites will 
not do so. Full expenses run upwards of 500 
credits per day, although poor patients will be 
charged considerably less. 

The Carosites have also made significant 
strides in the cataloguing and treatment of many 
kinds of mental illnesses. Their sanitariums are 
clean, well-lit places where healing, not incar- 
ceration, is emphasized. 


Newlife Point 


Newlife Point is the only city on Carosi XII. It 
was built on the landing site of the first refugee 
ships. There is still much left to build, so the city 
is still in development. Much of the skyline is 
dotted with the skeletal frames of buildings un- 
der construction. 

The Newlife Point starport is located in the 
northwestern section of the city, close to the 
major hospitals, asylums, and cybernetics fitting 
centers. 

There area few aspects of Newlife Point which 
off-worlders regard as negatives. By far, the worst 
of theseis considered to be the pathetically small 
number of bars extant. It appears that the Caro- 
sites are not enamored with alcohol and the 
effects it has, both long- and short-term, on the 
physiologies of many beings. As a result, estab- 
lishments that serve liquor are kept to a mini- 
mum, and the liquor itself is taxed heavily. In all 
fairness, it needs to be mentioned that the rev- 
enue generated goes towards the continued im- 
provement of medical facilities most likely to be 
used by off-worlders. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


The other aspect of Newlife Point that fails to 
impress visitors is the constant stream of dietary 
advice given to restaurant patrons by the waiters, 
cooks, doormen, busboys, and passersby. “Eat 
right and live right,” is the most popular phrase 
heard in restaurants. Some visitors to Carosi XII 
claim the Carosite doting is worse than the exces- 
sive fretting done by some Protocol Droids. 


Hot Springs 

Located inside a beautiful crystalline cave are 
several huge pools of mineral-laced warmed wa- 
ter. The water is heated by underground volca- 
nic activity. 

The mineral content and the high temperature 
combine to produce a relaxing and very healthy 
bath. Soaking in the hot springs for two hours 
allows an injured character to make one extra 


Mike Vilardi 


natural healing roll per day. 

There are always six Carosite attendants on 
duty to help visitors. The Hot Springs are con- 
nected to Newlife Point by an underground sub- 
way system. Some people enjoy taking pleasure 
boats from Newlife Point to Hot Springs. The 
springs are located a short two kilometer walk 
from the Avuae coast. 


New Republic Outpost 


The current Carosite leader, Omo Taj, has 
given the New Republic permission to construct 
an outpost on Carosi XII. The outpost is built into 
the side of amountain near northern shore of the 
Avuae Sea. Its location is not disclosed to off- 
worlders, and its secret is guarded most jeal- 
ously. 

Gamemasters can use the floorplans for the 
Tierfon Rebel Outpost, found on pages 110-114 of 
the Star Wars Sourcebook. 

The outpost complement is: 


Personnel 

Pilots 28 
Ground Troops 54 
Officers 14 
X-wing ground crew 32 
Y-wing ground crew 32 
Technicians 24 
General Staff 24 
Intelligence Personnel 10 
Vehicles 

Airspeeders 5 

Landspeeders 2 

Speeder Bikes 4 

X-Wing starfighters 8 

Y-Wing starfighters 8 

Shuttles 4 


The outpost commander is Balderik Rajana, 
an idealistic young man who has been fighting 
the Empire for as long as he can remember. He 
maintains good relations with the Carosites. 


The Avuae 


The Avuae is a small sea and the only 
aboveground body of water on Carosi XII. The 
Avuae is teeming with marine life, which serves 
as a source of protein for the Carosites. The 
water is extremely cold, but due to its high min- 
eral content, it never freezes over. 

Many Carosites enjoy a refreshing dip in the 
icy water of the Avuae. The Carosites claim that 
the water has healing properties, and that all 
creatures can benefit from a good soak in the 
ocean. Of course, Carosites have fur to keep 
them warm. 


ae ee 


ARS 


Rinacats 

DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 7D 

STRENGTH 6D 

Size: 2 meters from head to tail, one 

meter at the shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Claws: 4D damage 
Teeth: 5D damage 

Combat: Rinacats will take up positicn on a 
ledge or boulder and spring down on prey pass- 
ing beneath. When attacking something larger 
than themselves, they normally attempt to catch 
its throat in their jaws. They will then drag the 
carcass off to eat at their leisure. 

Using Rinacats in the Roleplaying Game: The 
most dangerous creature on Carosi XII is the 
rinacat, amountain-dwelling predator, renowned 
for its ability to track prey for weeks without 
losing the scent or tiring markedly. Rinacats have 
been known to traverse entire continents to bring 
down particularly desired prey. 

One of the unusual traits of the rinacat is its 
ability to survive for up toamonth without water, 
making it able to survive even in the rare arid 
regions. 

The rinacat possesses aset of sharp teeth with 
which to rend and tear prey. It is unable to bare 
them as many other members of the cat family 
can — stories that a rinacat signals hostilty by 
showing its fangs are myths, which have resulted 
in the deaths of a number of Carosites. 

Rinacats primarily prey on teshek and other 
herd animals. But when wounded, sick or mad- 
dened, these creatures have been known to come 
down from the mountains and attack Carosites 
living on the fringes of Newlife Point. 

Rinacats do not travel in packs, but rather 
hunt alone. In general, the only time you see more 
than one rinacat at a time is when a mother is 
training her cubs to bring-down prey. 


The Sudden Restoration 


This huge hospital ship was named the Sudden 
Restoration only after it had already been in active 
service for a year. Many of its patients marvelled at 
“the ship which appeared suddenly in our system, 
and quickly began healing the sick and restoring 
the injured.” The name stuck. There is talk among 
the Carosites of constructing more such vessels. 


The Sudden Restoration 
Craft: Sudden Restoration HS-1 
Type: Hospital Ship 
Length: 330-meters 
Scale: Capital 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


RE m 


-WA 


CAROSI XII DIAGRAM 
The Sudden Restor 


Command 
Crew Area 


Crew: 600 (20 officers, 200 enlisted, 380 
medical personnel) 

Maximum Patients: 2,000 

Medical Droids: 1,000 

Cargo Capacity: 2,000 metric tons 

Consumables: 1 year 

Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 

Nav Computer: Yes 

Hyperdrive Backup: Yes 

Sublight Speed: 2D 

Maneuverability: 1D 

Hull: 2D 

Shields: 1D 


Note: The Sudden Restoration, in a compro- 
mise with New Republic leaders, has reluctantly 
equipped itself with two X-wing fighters as guards. 
The hospital ship has large enough hangars that 
it can launch the X-wings with no difficulty. Most 
of the time, however, the ship relies on its peace- 
ful reputation as its defense. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Hospital 
Area 


Engine 
Section 


Adventure Idea 


Rinacat attacks in the vicinity of the New Re- 
public outpost have been occurring more and 
more frequently, claiming the lives of a number 
of sentries and throwing operations into disar- 
ray. Belief that it was one sick animal doing all the 
killings was dispelled when three rinacats were 
seen in the area. 

The characters are hired to hunt down the 
offending creatures. Once in the mountains, they 
discover that an Imperial spy has discovered the 
location of the outpost and has trained rinacats 
to stage guerilla attacks. Both the spy and his 
man-eaters will have to be eliminated to ensure 
the security of the base. 


Adventure Idea 


New Republic soldiers being treated on the 
Sudden Restoration have begun dying, all from 
apparently “natural causes.” The characters are 
asked to go undercover on the ship and discover 
the truth. 


Carosi XII 


AR 
ARS 


Once there, they find to their shock that one of 
the Carosite physicians has been blackmailed by 
the Empire into acting as their agent. The New 
Republic soldiers are not dead, merely comatose 
— their coffins, shot off into space, are being 
recovered by an Imperial vessel and then revived 
for interrogation. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are hired by the Republic to 
go to Carosi XII and pick up some medical sup- 
plies. The supplies are to be delivered to a star 
system that is being blockaded by the Empire. 

Oncethe characters arrive, they find that their 
mission has changed somewhat. Not only are 
they supposed to deliver the supplies to the 
planet in question, but they are also to pick upa 
famous surgeon wanted by the Empire, and bring 
him back to Carosi, without bringing the Empire 
along for the ride! 

After the characters manage to get by the Impe- 
rial blockade and on to the planet, the characters 
are given yet another wrinkle: the surgeon has 
already been captured by the Empire, and is ona 
small, temporary base that the Empire has set up 
on the planet’s moon. A rescue is called for. 

To all this, the gamemaster must add the 
imperative that the Empire must not follow the 
characters back to the Carosi system lest it be 
discovered and subjugated by the Empire. 


Adventure Idea 


While in space, the characters receive a dis- 
tress call from the Sudden Restoration. Appar- 
ently, someone does not respect its non-combat- 
ant nature and is attacking the vessel 

Arriving at the scene, the characters find a 
Corellian stock light freighter attacking the huge 
ship. When the characters arrive, the ship will 
break off its attack and flee. The Sudden Restora- 
tion, bound for Carosi XII, will ask that the char- 
acters escort the hospital to its system. 

Unknown to both vessels, the marauding 
freighter follows the ships to Carosi XII. The 
freighter is owned by a half-crazy bounty hunter/ 
professional killer. An Imperial official that 
crossed a crime boss is currently recovering on 
the Restoration. The crime boss has hired the 
bounty hunter to kill the official. The bounty 
hunter and his crew of four miscreants do not 
care about the hospital ship or the innocent 
patients on-board. They are single-mindedly fo- 
cusing on killing the official. 

Once the Sudden Restoration arrives in-sys- 
tem, the Imperial official is transferred to the 
Carosi Alpha Hospital. The bounty hunter lands 
several hours later and begins his search for the 
official by going to countless public places and 
trying to bribe, bully or trick anyone he can find 
for information. 

The characters may wind up running afoul of 


1 


28 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Mike Vilardi 


EE, ————_——_—_== 


-WA 


the bounty hunter and his crew. The gamemaster 
must decide how successful the bounty hunter is 
in finding out the correct location of the target. 

Itis very possible that the Carosites may wish to 
hire the characters to serve as security for the sick 
official, a truly ironic twist. If this happens, the 
climactic scene is the successful infiltration of 
Alphabythe bounty hunter, endinginabattlebetween 
the hunter and his gang and the characters. 


Adventure Idea 


A variation of the previous, idea, a frail, sick old 
woman hires the characters to take her to Carosi. 
Unknown to them, she is a highly-placed Imperial 
official. Still, she bears them no ill will, for she is 
dying, and she only wants a less painful place to 
die, and the facilities on Carosi XII are ideal. 

Unfortunately, a group of free-traders who are 
allied with the New Republic are tailing her, and 


will attack the characters’ ship. These worthless 
traders are using their connections as members 
of the New Republic in order to do what they 
please. 

When the characters get the old woman to 
Carosi XII, the free-traders will pursue and hunt 
them down, convinced that the characters are 
“Imperial stooges.” They have their heart so set 
on committing violence that they will not stop to 
ask questions. 

The perfect ending to this adventure would be 
to give the characters the opportunity to turn the 
free-traders in at the nearest New Republic out- 
post (which of course, happens to be on Carosi 
XID. There will be a reward for the characters for 
removing this blot from the Republic’s reputa- 
tion, plus the undying enmity of the free-traders 
who were thrown out. The characters may very 
well end up making enemies for life! 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


29 


System Summary 


Ergeshui is the only planet in the Agash sys- 
tem. Ergeshui has two moons, Magresh and 
Sagresh, causing dramatic tidal changes on the 
planet. 

The Agash system is fairly free from Imperial 
intervention. New Republic vessels make routine 
stopovers. Many free-traders put aside their re- 
vulsion at Ergesh aesthetics in order to trade for 
the much-prized Ergesh rum. 


Ergeshui 


This giant planet has two small continents. 
The main continent is called Ersheg, and the 
lesser one is named Queesh. There are few per- 
manent islands due to the harsh tides. 

The atmosphere on Ergeshui is thick and hot. 
On most days, thick clouds cover the skies. De- 
spite this heavy cover, enough red sunlight fil- 
ters through to give the landscape an eerie red- 
dish cast. The temperature remains at a consis- 
tent 30 degrees Centigrade year round, day and 
night. Many off-worlders have remarked that the 
planet is like one huge greenhouse. 

The most interesting natural phenomenon to be 
found on Ergesui is the tidal flats. Due to the 
prescence of the moons, there are huge variations 
in the tide. When the tide is out, the continents 
almost double in size. When the tide comes in, the 
exposed land is flooded. The Ergesh find this pleas- 
ant, especially since, despite their bulk and weight, 
they can float. Most off-worlders find it dangerous, 
since the tides come roaring in at 60 kilometers per 
hour. The roar of the travelling water is deafening. 

Any character caught in a tidal wave takes 4D 
of damage and must make a Difficult swimming 
check each round. Failing the check inflicts an 


System Datafile 


Agash system, star: Agash, red giant star. One planet 
only, Ergeshui. Reasonably free of Imperial influence, strong 
New Republic ally. Strong demand for electronics, manu- 
factured goods. Limited Service starport located adjacent 


to Outworlder City. 

TRAVELLER’S ADVISORY: Ergeshui has a Type III atmo- 
sphere. Most species, including Humans, require breath- 
ing apparatus to survive for any length of time on planet's . 
surface. 


additional 2D of damage to the character, plus a 
cumulative -1 penalty to additional swimming 
checks. If the character fails three checks in a 
row, he has drowned. 

The seas of Ergeshui are composed of water, 
salt, and other chemical compounds. The seas 
are not polluted— quite the contrary, TheErgesh 
have taken special care to ensure they live in 
harmony with their environment. 

Ergeshui soil is one of the planet's best-kept 
secrets. This soil is so laced with nutrients and 
minerals that it can grow and support plant life 
from most places in the galaxy. The Ergesh donot 
export this soil, as they feel that this would 
deplete the planet, and perhaps even pose a 
threat to their society, should the Empire hear of 
its properties. 


Feeling Gravity's Pull 

Characters adventuring on Ergeshui suffer a-1D 
penalty to all Strength and Dexterity-related ac- 
tions (except for resisting damage, which re- 
mains the same). Characters must make one 
Moderate stamina check per round of heavy ex- 
ertion. Characters who fail this check must double 
the amount of time they take to complete the 
task, or suffer a -3D penalty to all Dexterity and 
Strength-related actions except resisting damage 
in combat. 

In addition, whenever a character suffers dam- 
age from collisions or falling, an extra 2D are 
added to the damage. 

Note that these rules are not used when char- 
acters are in Outworlder City, as it has artificially 
moderated Standard gravity. 


The Ergesh 


The average Ergesh stands two meters tall and 
resembles a rounded heap of moving plant mat- 
ter. Their bodies are covered with drooping, 
slimy appendages that range from two centime- 
ters to three meters in length, and from one 
millimeter to five centimeters in width. Ergesh 
coloration is a blend of green, brown, and grey. 
The younger Ergesh have more green, the elders 
more brown. A strong smell of ammonia and 
rotting vegetation follows an Ergesh wherever it 
goes. Ergesh have a life expectancy of 200 years. 

Due to their physiology, Ergesh can breathe 
underwater, though they do prefer “dry” land. 
Their thick, wet skin also acts as a strong protec- 


30 


„Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Ergeshui Swamp 
Type: Terrestrial 


Temperature: Hot 

Hydrosphere: Moist 

Gravity: Heavy 

Terrain: Swamp 

Length of Day: 40 Standard Hours Heniaghe 
Length of Year: 380 Local Days 

Sapient Species: Ergesh (N) 

Points of Interest: Outworlder City, The Communal 


Pool, The Industrial Swampfields 


Starport: Limited Services 
Population: 800,000 
Government: Alliance/Federation 


Tech Level: Space 
Major Exports: Fertilizer, alcohol, textiles 


Major Imports: Electronics, manufactured goods 


ki SYSTEM DATA 
Monorail 
System Name: Agash being enemu 


Star Name: Agash Star Type: Red Giant World Summary 


A Ergeshui, the only world in the Agash system, is a 
ORBITAL BODIES huge planet with high gravity and oppressive humid- 


[Name | Planet Type ity. The rays of the red sun give an eerie crimson cast 
Terrestrial Swamp to the landscape. 


Two moons circle Ergeshui. This makes for colos- 
sal tidal changes, where entire sections of the two 
small continents are flooded, then exposed. Due to 
these raging tides, there are few permanent islands 
exposed on the world’s surface 

The atmosphere on Ergeshui is composed mostly 
of nitrogen and carbon dioxide, and Humans on the 
planet must use breathing devices. 

The planet is known for its plant-based products 
and by-products, especially fertilizer, alcoholic bev- 
erages, and textiles. In addition, the Ergesh, the 
dominant race on the planet, specialize in organic 
machines, most of them “grown” in the area called 
the Industrial Swampfields. 


Stephen Crane 


Western 
Hemisphere 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 31 


tive layer against all manner of weapons. 

Ergesh communicate using sound-based 
speech. Their voices sound like thick mud com- 
ing to a rapid boil. In fact, many Ergesh, espe- 
cially those that deal most with Outworlders, 
speak Basic, though it sounds as if the speaker is 
talking underwater. Their grasp of Basic is good, 
though due to how they perceive and under- 
stand the world around them, they often omit 
personal pronouns (1, me) and articles (a, the). 
Most small words in the Ergesh tongue are repre- 
sented by vocal inflections. 

Ergesh do not have faces in the accepted 
sense of the word. A number of the smaller 
tentacles are actually opticstalks, the Ergesh 
equivalent of eyes, while others are sensitive to 
sound waves. 

Through the course of the average Ergesh day, 
a member of the species may pick up many 
potentially harmful microorganisms. In order to 
cleanse themselves, they consume Kaloob, a 
popular refreshment among the Ergesh. Kaloob 
causes every gland and organ in an Ergesh body 
to produce excess amounts of fluids and secre- 


Ergesh 
Height: 2 meters 


DEXTERITY 2D PERCEPTION 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D STRENGTH 3D 
MECHANICAL 2D TECHNICAL 3D 
Armor: 2D 

Roleplaying Hints: Ergesh are gentle, 
intelligent, and curious, especially about 
off-worlders’ manners and equipment. In 
some respects, they are fearless, though 
much of this stems from their naivete. 

Also remember: Ergesh are very wet. 
Fluid is everywhere, and it means every- 
thing to them. Though there is no word for 
dryness, there is a term for “not wet,” usu- 
ally used as a curse. 

The Ergesh do not stand on ceremony, 
and are very informal. Concepts like man- 
ners and privacy are alien to them. Ergesh 
prize life and hate destructive things. The 
best way to make an Ergesh angry is to 
claim to be either a bounty hunter or an 
Imperial representative. 

Due to their inquisitive nature and bold- 
ness, Ergesh make excellent scientists. 

Quote: “Ah! Happy are Ergesh to see 
visitors come! Ergesh home is visitors’ 
home! Act accordingly! Consume much food! 
Drink huge fluid amounts! Seek comfort!” 


Ergeshui EEE.) | = 


ARS 


tions, which cleanses the body and refreshes the 
drinker. Note that while Kaloob can be used by 
other races as a detoxifier and antibiotic, it pro- 
duces some rather awful side effects. 

If a non-Ergesh drinks Kaloob, every gland, 
organ, and system begins to function in over- 
drive. Tears, sweat, and any other bodily secre- 
tion begins pouring out of their respective ducts. 
After 10 minutes ofthis, acrippling nauseastrikes 
the victim for 20 minutes. After these tribula- 
tions, all dangerous toxins and chemicals have 
been purged from their systems. 

Ergesh cannot get intoxicated, drugged, or 
poisoned by most substances. Their immune 
systems break down such substances quickly, 
then the natural secretions carry out the harmful 
or waste elements. 

Ergeshreproduce byaspecial ritual. TwoErgesh 
each produce a seed which has their respective 
genetic codes. Both seeds are planted together in 
a special swamp called the Shoolbloorp, or “Land 
of Beginnings.” In 20 Ergeshui days, a young Ergesh 
grows up from the ground, self-aware and ready to 
join society. Being asexual beings, Ergesh have no 
concept of gender. Each Ergesh may produce one 
seed every two Ergeshui years. 

In terms of personality, Ergesh are boisterous, 
curious, and rather naive. They are social beings, 
greatly prizing friends and “family.” Despite their 
fearsome appearance, they are not violent. Un- 
fortunately, Ergesh have yet to become accus- 
tomed to all of the diverse races of the galaxy. To 
Ergesh, Humans are the “unfathomable alien 
race.” Still, if a Human makes an effort to get to 
know the Ergesh race, he may find that he has 
made friends for life. References to gender, fig- 
ures of speech, and the condition known as “dry” 
are lost on the Ergesh. 

Ergesh personal names are long affairs, with 
many odd bubbling noises included. The Ergesh 
tolerate being given nicknames by off-worlders 
that they are dealing with. 

Once per year, there comes a day when both 
moons are aligned in a certain way, with devas- 
tating effect upon the Ergesh. During this period, 
the Ergesh act irrational, violent, even insane. It 
is almost as if the Ergesh are intoxicated. This 
day is called the “Bad Water Pull,” and all off- 
worlders are encouraged to stay clear of the 
native population until the effects cease. 

Ergesh definitely believe in the Force. They 
have heard tales of the Jedi, and are rather anx- 
ious to meet one. Since practically everything on 
Ergeshui is alive, the Ergesh feel that the Force is 
especially strong on their world. 

When an Ergesh gets angry, it quakes and 
begins to make a sound something like gargling. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


IT: 
-WA 


They are poor combatants, with their most effec- 
tive attack simply trampling over their oppo- 
nents. Due to their massive bulk (an adult Ergesh 
weighs half a metric ton), this crude tactic is 
extremely effective against foes Human-sized and 
smaller. The major drawback of this attack is 
that the Ergesh must be close to his opponent to 
begin with, as they are not swift enough to catch 
a fleeing foe. 

Ergesh are divided into clans, which have formed 
afederation that rules the planet. Theeldest Ergesh 
from each clan is part of the governing body. This 
government meets monthly in the Communal Pool. 
The Ergesh federation keeps in regular contact 
with the leaders of the New Republic. 

Ergesh are not hesitant about travelling into 
space. They wear special belts that not only pro- 
duce a nitrogen field that allows them to breathe, 
but also retains the vast majority of their moisture. 
The Ergesh travel in living spaceships (see below). 

When embarking on potentially dangerous 
expeditions, Ergesh wear a harness that holds a 
series of containers. In each container sits a 
small plant bud that produces an electrical cur- 
rent. When hurled at a dry opponent, the plant’s 
current discharges and causes injury (4D dam- 
age dispersed by insulated armor). Each bud can 
only be used once, and an Ergesh normally car- 
ries 24 buds. 


Ergesh Society 

In their dealings with each other, Ergesh are 
honestand fair. Theirs is asociety with no classes, 
no discrimination, no wants. There is no crime 
among the Ergesh. Property is a communal thing, 
to be shared each according to his own need. 

This utopian situation quickly breaks down 
when off-worlders are placed into the equation. 
Ergesh are often taken advantage of by unscru- 
pulous off-worlders, but fortunately, there are 
usually New Republic agents around to undo the 
damage, or more travelled Ergesh able to come 
to the aid of their naive kinfolk. 

Ergesh do not use money, but instead rely on 
a barter system. The only place credits are used 
(or even accepted) is Outworlder City. 


Ergesh Techology 


Ergesh machinery is a fusion of plant matter 
and manufactured materials. This equipment 
cannot be deprived of moisture for more than 
one Standard hour, or it ceases to function prop- 
erly. The Ergesh have their own versions of 
comlinks, hand computers, and an odd device 
known as a sensory intensifer, which serves the 
Ergesh in the same way that macrobinoculars 
serve Humans. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


The Ergesh Starjumper 

The Starjumper is an organic vessel, resem- 
bling a huge brown cylinder 30 meters wide, with 
long green tentacles trailing from the hull. The 
Starjumpers are biologically-engineered crea- 
tures, not lifeforms native to Ergeshui. The ten- 
tacles act as navigational, fire control, and com- 
munications appendages for the ship-creature. 
This versatile vessel is able to make planetary 
landings. 

All Starjumpers are sentient, thinking crea- 
tures whose huge bulks can survive the harsh 
rigors of space. In fact, the Ergesh and the 
Starjumpers share a symbiotic relationship. The 
ship derives sustenance from the Ergesh’s bod- 
ies, and the Ergesh get to where they are going. 
Most Starjumpers have unique personalities, and 
are treated by the Ergesh as trusted friends or 
clan members. 

Starjumpers have the ability to self-repair battle 
damage. Consider the ship to bea character, and 
allow it natural healing rolls, except that it may 
only perform this action (and no other) once 
every three hours. 

The interior of aStarjumper is coveredinalayer 
of muck. The Ergesh control the ship by touching 
their tentacles to certain areas of the ship, which 


Rob Caswell 


Ergeshui 


ARa 


ERGESHUI DIAGRAM 
The Star Jumper 


Access 
Orifices 


Ergesh Spaceship 
STRENGTH 10D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D PERCEPTION 4D 
PERCEPTION 4D TECHNICAL 6D 


Craft: Ergesh Starjumper 
Type: Exploratory/Commerce Vessel 
Length: 200 meters 
Scale: Starfighter 
Crew: 800 Ergesh 
Cargo Capacity: 4,000 metric tons 
Consumables: 6 months 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x6 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Hyperdrive Backup: Yes 
Sublight Speed: 1D 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Hull: 3D 
Weapons: 
One Electrical Beam 
Fire Control: 6D 
Damage: 5D 
Shields: 2D 


causes particular systems to activate. 
Ships cannot reproduce. Instead, they are 


Communication Appendage 


“grown” in the tidal flats. It takes six months to 
“grow” a Starjumper. 

Starjumpers are useful for exploration and 
trade, but are too fragile to be used as blockade- 
runners or fighting ships. Unfortunately, the ships 
are useless to Humans and their associated races 
as only an Ergesh can manipulate the controls. 

In addition, the Starjumpers have a nasty ten- 
dency to be quite argumentative. They dislike 
combat, and even show a marked reluctance to 
visit certain planets where they have had bad 
experiences. 


Erglush 


The capital city of Ergeshui is Erglush, located 
on the continent of Ersheg. In fact, Erglush is one 
of the few cities on the planet. 

Buildings average 40 meters in height, and are 
composed of mud and other organic matter. The 
two favorite architectural designs are tall col- 
umns or squat pyramids, with no doors but plenty 
of window openings. 

Buildings of Ergesh design are either solitary 
living creatures or an amalgam of symbiotic life 
forms. No doors are needed because the build- 
ings know who they belong to. Each Ergesh has a 
specific tentacle/stalk configuration unique in 


34 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Cathleen Hunter 


m ae aS 


the same way as human fingerprints, and Ergesh 
buildings can tell members of the species apart. 
Ergesh buildings have ramps instead of stairs — 
indeed, stairs are unheard of, and there is no 
such word in the native language. 

Off-worlders are permitted to visit Erglush, 
but the vast majority prefer Outworlder City, 
which is connected to Erglush by the Living 
Monorail. 

Erglush is also home to the Industrial 
Swampfields, located on the outskirts where the 
tidal flats begin. These huge fields are used to 
grow the organic machines that power Ergesh 
society. One entire section is devoted to the 
growing of Starjumper organic spaceships. The 
Industrial Swampfields produce products around 
the clock, and are constantly manned by over 
2,000 Ergesh workers and farmers. 


The Living Monorail 

This transportation system consists of two 
huge vines, each stretching from Erglush to 
Outworlder City. Both vines are fixed in place by 
root systems, which also serve to nourish them. 
On each vine is a bean-shaped growth that actu- 
ally slides along the length of the vine, propelled 
by methane gases and a photosynthetic charge. 
The growths are the “cars” of the monorail, and 
each holds up to 40 Ergesh (for counting pur- 
poses, one Ergesh equals two Human-sized pas- 
sengers). The cars make the run between the two 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


cities in four hours. Thus, every fourth hour of 
the day, a car leaves both cities. 

Passage on the Monorail is free. The trip is 
non-stop. The cars are living entities that move 
by instinct. 


Outworlder City 


This area is also called Dry Ground, Safe At 
Last, Sanity, and, in the Ergesh tongue, Oorlglush. 
Outworlder City is protected by a transparent 
dome, and climate-controlled to maintain a com- 
fortable humidity level and a constant tempera- 
ture of 20 degrees Centigrade. 

The city was constructed 30 years ago to take 
care of off-worlders who visit Ergeshui and can- 
not tolerate the climate and the land. Outworlder 
City is built on huge metal supports that raise it 
above the soggy terrain. 

The starport, such as it is, is located just 
outside the dome, where a mechanical monorail 
shuttles people back and forth. Expanding the 
starport is the next thing on the Ergesh agenda. 

At any given time, Outworlder City has 50,000 
aliens living, working, playing, and resting within 
it. There is a permanent staff of 5,000 aliens who 
work the businesses and run the services. There 
is a perpetual quest for more workers, and the 
pay is good. 

Very few Ergesh ever enter Outworlder City, 
as most of them consider it to be too sterile. 


Plasticrete sidewalks, metal walkways, and stairs 
are things that almost every Ergesh considers 
offensive. Still, there is an Ergesh Relations Of- 
fice, staffed by 10 of the natives. The building is 
an Ergeshui living construct and is located at the 
base of the dome, where it can tap into the 
“healthy” soil of the planet just past the shield. 

The New Republic keeps a small embassy 
staffed with 30 Humans in Outworlder City. They 
have the necessary equipment to communicate 
with ships entering the system or close to it. The 
head of the embassy is a young man named Arvin 
Tadle, a competent bureaucrat. 

Outworlder City also contains the usual facili- 
ties so vital to spacefarers, such as bars, restau- 
rants, medical facilities, equipment shops, casi- 
nos, and hotels. 

Weaponry is tough to purchase on Ergeshui, 
even in Outworlder City. The Ergesh weapons 
are not for sale, and the only weapons that can be 
purchased are melee weapons and blaster pis- 
tols. One needs a license for the latter. 

Several galactic corporations have offices in 
the City, especially those that aspire to purchase 
harvesting rights to some of Ergeshui's flora. 
Unfortunately, not all of these companies have 
the best interests of the Ergesh in mind. 


The Communal Pool 


Located on the smaller continent of Quesh, 
this is a great, miry swamp pool with especially 
heavy vegetation. The swamp is flooded with the 
Ergesh equivalent of water, four meters deep. 
Several odd columns of plant life, arranged in a 
geometric pattern, mark this spot. The Poolis the 
Ergesh equivalent of a governmental meeting 
hall. Every month, the heads of all of the clans 
gather at the Communal Pool for a continuous 40 
hour meeting, in which all planetary business is 
conducted. 

There are 80 clans, each with about 10,000 
members. Each clan leader, the eldest Ergesh in 
the group, brings one Ergesh as an aide and 
ceremonial security guard. 


Travelling From Ersheg to Quesh 


Intercontinental travel is achieved by huge 
airships, much like dirigibles. The air sac is made 
up of giant plant spores attached to each other. 
A gondola made of hardened mud and plant 
matter is attached to the underside of the air sac. 
The gondola can hold 20 Ergesh, the Human 
equivalent, or a combination of the two. 

The airships run from Erglush to the Commu- 
nal Pool. The trip takes 20 hours, with one airship 
departing each point every 20 hours. Interconti- 


Ergeshui SG WA cr 


6 c——sa_sasao>so3S wars 


nental travel is not in heavy demand. Only when 
the clan leaders get together is there heavy air 
traffic, as extra airships are added to handle the 
increased demand. 


Creatures of Ergeshui 


Swamp Skimmer (Garalalesh) 

DEXTERITY 5D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Hide/Sneak 5D 

STRENGTH 6D 

Orneriness: 5D 

Speed Code: 6D (swimming) 

Size: 3 meters from head to tail 

Scale: Creature 

Armor: 2D to Strength 

Attacks: 

Mouth: 5D damage 

Combat: The swamp skimmer swims towards 
its intended victim, mouth agape, and tries to 
swallow its prey whole. If it fails to accomplish 
this, it will settle for taking bites out of its prey 
until the latter dies of wounds. 

Aswamp skimmer may only attempt this ma- 
neuver if it manages to take its quarry by sur- 
prise. If the skimmer exceeds the difficulty num- 
ber by more than 10, it swallows its prey, which 
takes 3D damage for every combat round spent 
inside the creature. Any attacks made by the 
victim when inside the skimmer are Very Difficult 
tasks. If the victim cannot extricate himself from 
the swamp skimmer within five rounds, he dies. 

Using Swamp Skimmers in The Roleplaying 
Game: The swamp skimmer is a definite hazard 
of the swamps, and is meant to be used to drive 
home the point of just how dangerous such areas 
are. Skimmers swim silently through the murky 
waters, hunting alone, looking for prey. 

As a good rule of thumb, swamp skimmers will 
not attack a creature whose length is two meters 
or more. It prefers smaller creatures, so that it 
may swallow them without difficulty. 


Muckworms (Garool) 

DEXTERITY 3D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 6D 

Speed Code: 4D 

Size: 2 meters long 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Bite: 4D damage 

Combat: Muckworms enjoy fastening them- 
selves to their prey using their toothy maw. Once 
attached, they suck fluids out of their victims, for 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


—ST. 
-WA 


2D of damage per round. They stop when the 
victim is dead. 

In order to remove a muckworm, the victim 
must generate a Strength roll that exceeds the 
muckworm's Strength roll. 

Using Muckworms in The Roleplaying Game: 
The muckworms are deadly enemies of the 
Ergesh, since these creatures can actually hurt 
the huge beings. On the other hand, the Ergesh 
consider muckworm a great delicacy, so in many 
cases it becomes a question of who eats whom 
first. 

Muckworms are vicious predators, often hunt- 
ing in groups of 1D+2. They are as at home in the 
water and on land. Their speed code is the same 
whether they are swimming, crawling, or bur- 
rowing through the soil. 


Nemats 

DEXTERITY 6D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 1D 

Size: 25 centimeters, wingspan of 50 

centimeters 

Speed Code: 2D (flying) 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Stingers: 2D damage 

Combat: Nemats nest in the swamps and will 
attack any warm-blooded creature. They attack 
in swarms of up to 100, and the sight of nemats in 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


the air has been likened to that of a fog rolling in. 
Although their stingers contain no venom, their 
bite is painful. A sufficient number of stings can 
fell even the strongest prey. 

Using Nemats in the Roleplaying Game: 
Nemats are flying insects, known for the shrill 
nature of their buzz and their agonizingly painful 
sting. They generally prey on swamp skimmers 
and other creatures, since they cannot derive 
satisfactory sustenance from the Ergesh. 

Once a nemat swarm has found likely prey, it 
will continue to plague him until there is no more 
blood to be drawn. Outrunning a nemat swarm is 
difficult, but impossible — however, Ergesh au- 
thorities recommend wearing protective cloth- 
ing or venturing into the swamp only in an en- 
closed vehicle. 

Newborn nemats are ravenous and are cred- 
ited with slaying an entire New Republic expedi- 
tionary team some time ago. The Ergesh have 
thus far refused requests to allow spraying in the 
swamps to eliminate the nemats, feeling that 
killing the insects would radically upset the bal- 
ance of nature on Ergeshui. 


Adventure Idea 


Imperial agents have been smuggled into the 
swamps of Ergesh, with orders to carry out a 
deadly research project: an effort to breed a 
larger, more vicious version of the nemat. It is 


Mike Vilardi 


believed that a swarm of such creatures would 
be sufficient to drive away the Humans staffing 
the New Republic’s embassy and leave the planet 
wide open for Imperial takeover (after, of course, 
the bugs were eradicated by aerial spraying). 

Such a scheme, if successful, could result in 
the enslavement of the Ergesh and the destruc- 
tion of their fragile ecosystem. The characters 
must find a way to stop the Imperial scientists 
before their experiment goes too far. 


Adventure Idea 


A team of mercenaries has recently arrived on 
Ergesh. Their plan: steal the secrets of the 
Starjumper, along with a few Ergesh, and deliver 
the vessel to a wealthy “collector” who wants to 
add the ship as an oddity in his private holdings. 

It is up to the characters to stop the mercs 
before they succeed in escaping off-planet with 
their captives. 


Adventure Idea 


Large portions of the population of Erglush 
are being ravaged by a mysterious disease that 
causes their bodies to dehydrate, inevitably bring- 
ing death. Ergesh scientists have discovered that 
the only possible cure lies in the genetic struc- 
ture of the muckworm, necessitating the charac- 
ters’ travelling into the swamp to capture some 
of the creatures. 

Unfortunately, not everyone wants them to be 
successful. A traitorous Ergush, in the employ of 
the Imperials, pursues them, sabotaging their 
equipment and attempting to leave them at the 
mercy of the swamp. 


Adventure Idea 


The New Republic embassy tracked some- 
thing that crashed on the continent of Ersheg, 
but they are not sure what it was. Due to its 
trajectory, they do not believe it was a natural 
object. Impact point is near the halfway mark of 
the Living Monorail. The party is asked to inves- 
tigate. Amonorail plant car will be conditioned to 
stop at the halfway point for the characters, and 
another will be by four hours later to pick them 
up. The ride from Outworlder City to the halfway 
point takes two hours. 

The object in question is a TIE fighter from the 
Star Destroyer Dark Nebula, the latter on a raid 
mission. The fighter was disabled and forced to 
make a crash landing on Ergeshui. The crash site is 
an hour's march from the monorail dropoff point. 

The pilot is still alive and is effecting repairs to 
his craft and its distress beacon. He is desperately 


Ergeshui ses Be 


ARS 


trying to call in help from his squadron comrades. 
The pilot will fix his distress beacon in 1D hours. 
Help will arrive in the form of 1D TIE fighters, 1D 
hours after the call goes out. 

If the pilot is captured alive, it is possible for 
the characters to get information out of him 
about the Star Destroyer’s planned raid on a 
neighboring star system under New Republic 
control, to take place two days from now. 

If the characters approach the New Republic 
embassy with this information, they will be in- 
formed that there are no rebel ships in the area, 
and their communications equipment does not 
have the rangeto reach past thesystem. The New 
Republic will suggest that the characters try to 
outrun the Destroyer and reach the system to 
warn them. 


Adventure Idea 


Loprana Soil-Enrichers is a corporation with 
branch offices on many planets, some Imperial, 
some New Republic, some neutral. Loprana has 
an office in Outworlder City, and it is a represen- 
tative from that office that calls the characters in 
order to hire them, 

The executives from Loprana want a team to 
investigate the Industrial Swampfields and take 
audio/video footage of the operations, Note that 
the executive will attempt to recruit the charac- 
ters almost as soon as they land. Loprana wants 
to get a group of off-worlders who have not yet 
had much exposure to the Ergesh, so the corpo- 
ration can feed the visitors propaganda about 
the Ergesh, as well as passing themselves off as 
the characters’ best allies on the planet. 

The New Republic embassy has their eyes on 
Loprana, since they know how unscrupulous 
that particular corporation is. They will assign 
four agents to tail the party. Once the agents see 
the party taking shots of the Swampfields, they 
will confront them and attempt an arrest, bring- 
ing along several Ergesh to make the whole pro- 
cedure official. 

The characters will have to convince the agents 
that they were unaware of Loprana’s duplicity. In 
order to clear their names, the characters may 
have to be part of a sting operation to nab 
Loprana’s executives in the act. This will be 
highly dangerous, since it is common knowledge 
that Loprana has hired muscle to keep their 
offices safe and their informants honest. 


Adventure Idea 
An Imperial plot is afoot to destroy the clan 
heads when they meet at the Communal Pool. 
The Empire has hired a bounty hunter and pro- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


——=_$=_====£=£_=&=&=&=[==—_—_[====— 
-WA 


vided him with a specially engineered poison 
which can overwhelm even the amazing Ergesh 
immune system. The bounty hunter has a crew/ 
gang of five outlaws. 

The bounty hunter arrives at the Outworlder 
City starport in his light freighter and begins 
asking the right people questions about Ergesh 
habits. The bounty hunter has three airspeeders 
to help him and his men to get around, and to 
carry the poison. 


Adventure Idea 


An Imperial sympathizer was discovered in 
Outworlder City and has escaped. He stole a 
landspeeder and roared off to the north. The 
characters are hired by the New Republic to 


bring him back. They are provided with a 
landspeeder. 

The sympathizer is following the Living Mono- 
rail trail north to the city of Erglush. Since he is a 
recent arrival on the planet, he is unaware of 
what the capital city holds. Once he arrives at 
Erglush, he will realize his mistake and continue 
north, unaware that he is riding ona tidal flat that 
will soon be flooded. 

Among suggested hazards/encounters for the 
characters are: swamp skimmers, Ergesh parties 
out for a stroll, and tidal shifts. As an extra 
wrinkle, the sympathizer could have friends lurk- 
ing in the tidal flats with a light freighter. He is 
supposed to rendezvous with them so that they 
may get him off the planet. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


39 


System Summary 


Tatrang IV, otherwise known as Fyodos, is the 
only habitable planet in the Tatrang system. It 
has three moons, their real names lost in the 
Great Cleansing, and they are now called Life- 
moon, Deathmoon and Warmoon. The people of 
Fyodos, centered on the continent of Tharak, are 
barbaric and superstitious. 

On Deathmoonand inthe mountains of Tharak 
on Fyodos, twin energy pulses go off at eight- 
hour intervals. These are the automated beacon 
systems of thetwo remaining bases in the Fyodos 
system. 

Tatrang I-III are commercially worthless. 
Tatrang V has rich ore deposits never touched by 
the ancient Fyodoi. Tatrang VI and VII are ringed 
gas giants with little economic value. The aster- 
oid belt surrounding the system contains trace 
minerals. The largest asteroid is big enough to 
hold a small scout base. 


Getting Into the System 


The asteroid belt around the Tatrang system is 
a treacherous navigational hazard. In order for a 
ship to get through, a starship piloting roll must be 
made. The number of these rolls required, as well 
as the difficulty of the task, is determined by the 
speed of the vessel as it travels through the belt. 
The slower the ship goes, the easier it is to avoid 
asteroids and other debris. (Note that it is possible 
for a ship to go slower than its listed Speed Code.) 
The gamemaster should ask the pilot's player how 
fast he intends to go, in terms of dice. 

It is also possible for a ship to come to a 
complete stop while in the belt. For every five 
minutes spent “on station” in the belt, the pilot 
must make a Moderate starship piloting roll. 

Failing a starship piloting roll while passing 
through the asteroid field means an asteroid has 
hit the ship. Roll 1D and consult the Asteroid 


System Datafile 


Tatrang system, star: Tatrang, red star. One terrestrial 
planet, Fyodos. Imperial astrocatalog designation Tatrang 


IV. Low-tech retrograde-Human population, no known stra- 
tegic resources. Mapping and exploration of planet incom- 
plete. No known Imperial installations to date. No known 
political inclination. 


Asteroid Field Travel Table 
Speed No. of Rolls Difficulty 
1D 6 Very Easy 
2D Easy 
3D4D Moderate 
5D Difficult 
Very Difficult 


Asteroid Damage Table 
Roll Asteroid Size Damage 
1 Tiny 1D 
2 Small 
3-4 Medium 
5 Large 
6 Very Large 


7 Shipwreck* 


*Gamemasters should determine the exact 
nature of the wreck, including how much of 
the ship in still intact and whether or not 
any cargo is salvageable. In all likelihood, 
there will be no survivors on board. 


Damage Table to determine exact damage. All 
damage listings are for starfighter scale. This 
chart is a modified version of the Asteroid Chart 
found in Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One. If the 
pilot fails his starship piloting roll by more than 
10, add a +1 penalty to the Asteroid Damage 
Table roll. 


Fyodos 


The planet Fyodos has three major continents, 
Tharak, Kalid and Othlor, along with several 
scattered islands. Only Tharak contains any rem- 
nant of the humanoid race known as the Fyodoi. 

Kalid and Othlor are overgrown into huge 
wildernesses, dominated by vast forests. Forests 
are also a frequent feature on Tharak, but the 
presence of the Fyodoi has created a demand for 
wood for houses, fuel and such, leading to the 
clearing of more and more land. 

Average temperature on Tharak is 20 degrees 
Centigrade in the daytime and five degrees at 
night. These temperatures run 20 percent higher 
in summer months and 20 percent lower in win- 
ter months. 


40 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


ee em 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Profile 
Fyodos Temperate Forest 


Starport: Landing field 
Population: 200,000 


Government: Tribal 
Tech Level: Feudal 


Major Exports: Melee weapons, hides 
Major Imports: Exotic foodstuffs, intoxicants, 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Tatrang 
Star Name: Tatrang Star Type: Red Giant 


ORBITAL BODIES 
(eee eS | es 
Fyodos Temperate Forest 
Gas Giant 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Hemisphere 


World Summary 


Fyodos is a world of faded glory, a retrograde 
culture that has toppled from the apex of high technol- 
ogy intothedarkabyss of barbarism and technophobia. 
The people of Fyodos are a proud, strong people, 
adhering to a strict warrior code and tribal customs. 

The Fyodoi hatred of technology stems from a 
devastating war called the “Great Cleansing.” Their 
great cities lie in ruins, many with technological 
artifacts hidden within them, but such areas are 
strictly taboo. 

Fyodos has three moons, Lifemoon, Deathmoon 
and Warmoon. The latter is home to an old, aban- 
doned pre-Cleansing base. 

The planet and its system were mapped by the 
Empire, but the planet was judged to be too trouble- 
some for purposes of base construction. Fyodos' 
location has no strategic value, nor is it on a major 
trade route. The Empire did not even bother naming 
the planet nor its moons. Only the star was given a 
name to facilitate mapping. The term “backwater” 
planet has shown up on every Imperial scouting 
report for Fyodos. The massive asteroid belt on the 
outer limits of the system is a navigational hazard. 


41 


Cathleen Hunter 


Fyodos D WHA Ss 
NN  —s—s—s—$[$(s—s—s—s—s_<"—"—— vz 


In terms of fauna, Fyodos is a haven for preda- 
tors, grazers, scavengers and birds. The conti- 
nents of Kalid and Othlor are also teeming with 
wildlife. 


Faded Glory 


Centuries ago, the planet Fyodos was home to 
a technologically advanced culture. The Fyodoi 
had a thriving space program, having explored 
their own moons and their nearest neighboring 
world, Tatrang V. 

The three continents of Fyodos were each 
populated by a race of Humans of similar techno- 
logical level but widely disparate philosophical 
beliefs. Though they sometimes cooperated, re- 
lationships between the various groups could 
best be described as strained. 

Tensions eventually reached such a point that 
war broke out between the three lands. The battles 
escalated until weapons of mass destruction were 
brought to bear — so thorough was the devasta- 
tion that the war came to be known as the “Great 
Cleansing.” The cities and entire populations of 
Othlor and Kalid were wiped out and the third 
continent, Tharak, suffered 90 percent casualties. 
Its cities, too, suffered grievous damage. 

Survivors made a point of avoiding the ruined 
cities, fearful that they might somehow still har- 
bor enemies capable of strikes. Instead, the refu- 
gees wadered off and began living on what little 
uncontaminated land remained. 

Years turned to decades, and then to centu- 
ries. The people regressed, coming to shun tech- 
nology, which was seen as the cause of the Cleans- 
ing. It became taboo to approach or touch any 
form of technology more complex than that pro- 
duced during the planet’s medieval period. 

The Fyodoi now dwell in stone and thatch 
huts, their society built around a tribal structure. 
Nature has slowly restored the other two conti- 
nents to habitable status, and they are now popu- 
lated by dozens of species of wildlife. The re- 
maining Fyodoi have no interest in travelling 
across the sea to Othlor of Kalid, and in fact the 
overwhelming majority of the people are un- 
aware that other continents even exist. 

Each tribe is led by a chief, with the largest 
extant group being the Roh. Once per season, the 
tribal leaders gather together for a sacred ritual 
called the “summat.” The chiefs gather in the 
middle of a circle of straw huts constructed 
especially for the ritual. All of the chiefs then 
begin yelling at each other, spouting gibberish, 
and continue this for four hours. At the end of 
that time, the chiefs rise up and set all but one of 
the huts aflame. 

What the chiefs are doing is reenacting the 


prelude to the “Great Cleansing” and a symbolic 
version of the war itself. After this is done, the 
chiefs have a great feast, and talk about tribal 
concerns. 

Every tribe also has a shaman. The title of 
shaman is hereditary. Each shaman teaches his 
son the secrets of the tribe. The greatest tribal 
secret is the fact that each tribe settled around a 
pre-Cleansing supply dump. As the people fled 
the great cities, they found refuge in shelters that 
contained food, equipment and weaponry. The 
only supplies now left are hundreds of thousands 
of rounds of slugthrower ammunition. Slug- 
throwing weapons are the only pieces of ad- 
vanced equipment the Fyodoi are allowed to 
carry by tribal law, a special dispensation made 
so that the tribes could defend themselves from 
predators (in essence, the shamans are ammuni- 
tion supply officers). 

Once every six months, the shaman of the Roh 
tribe makes a solitary pilgrimage to the still- 
functioning Tharak military installation. There 
he utters incantations and presses certain but- 
tons and levers in a sequence handed down 
through the generations. What the shaman is 
actually doingis resetting a pre-Cleansing “dooms- 
day weapon” with a six-month time cycle. Were 
the countdown allowed to reach zero, the thrice- 
daily energy pulse sent to Deathmoon would be 
cut off, triggering the launching sequence for 
literally hundreds of atomic missiles, which would 
impact around the planet, almost certainly com- 
pletely poisoning the world. 

Visitors to Fyodos are most likely to encoun- 
ter the Roh tribe, led by Kalor. He has a wife, 
Alyak, and two sons, Dubeh and Meerak. The Roh 
shaman is named Tseeach. In a pouch on his belt 
is a high-tech device, a receiver which emits a 
high-pitched hum ifthe silent alarm at the Tharak 
installation should betripped. Tseeah’s son, Erloi, 
is in training to become shaman someday. 

Tseeah’s hut is always guarded by a Fyodoi 
warrior. Within are old technical manuals, detail- 
ing the repair and maintenance of electronic 
equipment and slugthrowers. 


Average Fyodoi 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Brawling parry 4D, dodge 5D, melee parry 
6D, melee 7D, slugthrower 3D, missile 
weapon 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Survival 5D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Beast riding 4D+1 
PERCEPTION 1D 
Bargain 2D, hide/sneak 5D, search 2D 


LL ŮŮŐŐ——ŐŐŐŮŐŮŐŮŐ—Ė—/—/Ė 


42 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


— STA 
-WA 


STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 7D, climbing/jumping 5D, lifting 

6D, stamina 7D, swimming 6D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Equipment: slugthrower (damage 3D+1), spear 
(damage STR+1D+1), knife (damage STR+1D) 


Fyodoi usually hunt in groups of five. The 
average Fyodoi is loud, boisterous, narrow- 
minded, stubborn and a born warrior. They are 
friendly to those who show them friendship and 
formidable enemies to any who dare attack them. 

It is ironic that the Fyodoi blame technology for 
their demise, when it is quite clear to even the most 
casual observer that the Fyodoitendencytolaunch 
themselves enthusiastically into combat is in large 
part to blame for their plight. Their racial memo- 
ries are apparently strong, however — though it is 
permitted for tribe members to fight amongst them- 
selves, given sufficient provocation, war with other 
tribes is expressly forbidden. 


Landing Point 

The remains of a starport, with nothing more 
than a single runway extant, lies 14 kilometers 
north of the Roh village. An underground tran- 
sponder still broadcasts a signal intermittently. 
Any ship which approaches the planet will pick 
up the signal, which is a variant of the accepted 
landing field signal. Any vessel's nav systems can 
be used to determine the source of the signal. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


The landing point is always patrolled by 2D 
Fyodoi, who are unaware of its significance, but 
post guards as one of many timeless traditional 
ceremonies. 


Fyodoi Customs/Trade 


Fyodoiare expert hunters and blacksmiths. They 
are usually clad in armor made of hides and tanned 
leather and they carry spears, bows and arrows, 
daggers, swords and slugthrower pistols. 

The various tribes enjoy trading with each 
other. Any off-worlders who arrive (courtesy of 
the landing point) will find the Fyodoi to be 
enthusiastic traders. They particularly covet in- 
toxicants and will always be willing to trade for 
such substances. Trades involving weapons or 
ammunition must be conducted with the sha- 
man. While the average Fyodoi understands how 
to load, aim and fire a slugthrower, they all 
believe that the shaman makes the “magic metal 
stingers” by some holy ritual. 

In point of fact, a precious few off-worlders 
have landed on Fyodos and conducted trade 
with the planet’s residents. However, the trad- 
ers’ accounts of a planet with huge, flying lizards 
(the Galidyn) and men chasing them with primi- 
tive swords have been dismissed as tall tales. 

Justice among the Fyodoi, for crimes such as 
breaking taboos, stealing, etc. is trial by combat, 
usually a sword duel over a fiery pit. Occasion- 
ally, offenders are tossed into caverns inhabited 


Mike Vilardi 


by carnivorous beasts. 

Taboos include going to a technology spot, 
entering a shaman’s home unbidden, offering to 
the Fyodoi or using in their presence any sort of 
advanced technology (except slugthrower fire- 
arms). Things which cause offense but are not 
considered taboo include talking about the ben- 
efits of high-tech equipment or openly displaying 
such artifacts. 

The sight of aliens does not bother the Fyodoi, 
though if the alien is reptilian in appearance, 
there may be some initial suspicion of his inten- 
tions (due to the Galidyns). Droids are regarded 
as demons and will be attacked immediately, as 
will any who accompany them (no doubt thralls 
of the creature). 

The Fyodoi cannot comprehend the concept 
of ahuge galactic war. They will not choose sides, 
New Republic or Imperial. Rather, the Fyodoi 
wish to be left alone so they can hunt, fish, make 


weapons and kill Galidyn. 


Fyodoi written language can be considered 


obscure for purposes of comprehension. 


Report from Imperial Scout XX-298-B 


Upon achieving orbit around the only habitable planet 
inthe Tatrang system, | immediately began performing the 
necessary geo/bio surveys. After a few hours, a blip of 
energy showed up on the primary continent, followed by 
what seemed to bea response blip from the second largest 
moon. 

I brought my ship toalanding on the moon and found little 
more than a small observation base, abandoned of all life. I 
was unable to penetrate the lower levels of the base, but huge 
power generators, inactive at the time, were detected by my 
scanners. 

Making a landing on the planet, I was amazed to find a 
squad of primitive men brandishing archaic melee weap- 
ons. They seemed agitated at my presence, with their 
anger specifically directed at my equipment. After dis- 
patching them, I investigated the other base and found an 
automated communications relay station. 

It is my belief that the planet cataloged as Fyodos was 
once home to a technologically advanced society, which 
somehow collapsed over the course of time. In my opinion, 
the Empire has no use for sucha place, unless we intend to 
start using metal swords to fight the Rebels. 

I was not sure if I should include this, but when I got back 
into my ship and took off, I had a near collision with a huge 
flying lizard. There must have been some actual damage 
done to the ship’s external audio receptors, because it 
appeared that the lizard turned to me and said, “Terribly 
sorry, my fault!” 


44 


FyodosS == BAA fs 


ARS 


The Force and the Fyodoi 


If any character uses the Force in front of a 
Fyodoi, the tribesman will consider the charac- 
ter to be some sort of deity. While this may seem 
amusing at first, it will turn deadly serious when 
the tribe insists on keeping the deity in their 
camp forever. And they are just as willing to 
worship a dead deity as a live one. 


The Moons of Fyodos 


The three moons, Lifemoon, Deathmoon and 
Warmoon, all go through normal lunar cycles. 
According to the Fyodoi, battles are best fought 
when Warmoon is full. This includes hunting the 
Galidyn. When Deathmoon is full, superstitious 
fear grips the tribes (this can be explained, in 
part, by the fact that, when full, this particular 
satellite resembles the withered face of acorpse.) 
A full Lifemoon means parties, marriages and 
coming-of-age tests. The Fyodoi even seem less 
fearful of the Galidyn at this time and spend less 
energy hunting the creatures. 

All of the moons are airless chunks of rock, 
with very little in the way of minerals or other 
resources. They are devoid of life. 

When the moons come into conjunction, a 
unique gravitational flux is created. This has the 
effect of agitating the upper atmosphere of 
Fyodos, producingan aurora borealis effect. This 
also causes interference with sensors and com- 
munications for up to 20 hours. 

The biggest event in Fyodoi culture coincides 
with the conjunction of all three moons, which 
takes place once every 190 days. Theeventis called 
“the Gathering,” and features a huge feast attended 
by all the chiefs and shamans, along with at least 
100 members of each tribe. Tests of skill and 
combat prowess are featured, as well as children’s 
rites of passage into adulthood. The Gathering's 
commencementis signalled by the aurora borealis 
that marks the lunar conjunction. 


The Tharak Installation 


The Tharak installation once served as an 
orbital control site, monitoring and routing space 
traffic. Hidden inside a mountain, most of the 
installation’s lightpanels, environmental controls 
and other machinery still functions. The signal 
beacon is located at the mountain's peak. Unau- 
thorized intrusion into the installation triggers a 
silent alarm and a signal relayed to a device 
carried by theshaman. The shaman will bring the 
chief and 20 men with him to investigate, as the 
alarm means that a great taboo has been broken. 

There are any number of tools and spare parts 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


—ŚT. 
-WA 


FYODOS DIAGRAM 


here which can be salvaged for use by the char- 
acters, including power cells for energy weapons 
and ammunition for slugthrowers. The installa- 
tion also comes equipped with comfortable bar- 
racks, med facilities and communications gear, 
which gives evidence of the existence of a base 
on Deathmoon. 

The most amazing thing here is the holo-globe 
ofthe planet. This two-meter-wide hologram also 
shows the exact location of the three moons. 
Small points of light represent the Tharak instal- 
lation, the Deathmoon base, the landing strip, 
the player characters’ ship and any other vessel 
in orbit, all in their correct positions. 

The Galidyn have no understanding of what 
theinstallation was used for, but they watch over 
it once the shaman leaves. Because they have a 
poor understanding of Fyodoi technology (de- 
spite the advanced nature of their own devices), 
they have been unable to decipher the nature of 
the base. This place is a very likely spot for 
visitors to meet a Galidyn. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


ai 


Ruh Village 


Ri 


Tharak 
Installation 
100 km 

Fá 


Deathmoon Base 


This small base on Deathmoon was built to 
accomodate 24 men. Besides communications 
dishes, sensor arrays and telescopes, the base 
contains enough equipment to make the base the 
equivalent of a Limited Services starport. Of 
course, the base is abandoned, but in excellent 
shape, since there are no natural forces to pro- 
duce wear and tear. The base is still functional, 
and all energy and environmental controls are in 
working order. There is even fuel still in storage. 

Characters must make a Difficult security roll 
to be able to enter the base’s lower levels. Once 
in these levels, they may learn of the missiles in 
the base. 

Accessing the base computer gives an ac- 
count of the staff's indecision regarding whether 
or not to return to Fyodos during the crisis, stay 
put on the base, or even strike out for other 
planets. During the Cleansing, they received or- 
ders to launch the missiles, but in light of the 
overwhelming carnage they had witnessed, 
couldn't bring themselves to launch the attack. 


Cathleen Hunter 


Eventually, some left for the planet (and were 
subsequently incinerated). After the war ended, 
it initially appeared that no one on Fyodos had 
survived. Thus the personnel remaining on 
Deathmoon abandoned the base for other worlds. 

The computer also contains records regard- 
ing the missiles present on the moon. Getting 
that information out is a Difficult computer pro- 
gramming/repair skill roll. The misile silos are 
located in a crevasse 10 kilometers northwest of 
the base. The crevasse is eight kilometers deep, 
but not wide enough to hold anything larger than 
a Stock Light Freighter, 


The Galidyn 
Galidyn are huge, scaly lizards with small pre- 
hensile forepaws. Though most Galidyn are about 
five meters long with a 10-meter wingspan, some 


Mike Vilard! 


ARS 


specimens grow to only two meters in length, 
with a four-meter wingspan. Possessed of keen 
intellects and great curiosity, Galidyns prizeideas 
and discussion above all else, though every once 
in a while they “go native” and prey on some of 
Fyodos’ wandering herd animals. 

As a rule, the average Galidyn would rather 
launch into an analysis of Fyodoi combat tactics 
than actually fight them. However, their keen 
intelligence and impressive vocabulary should 
not be considered a sign of physical weakness. 
When angered, a Galidyn makes for a formidable 
foe. 

These lizard creatures have a lifespan of thou- 
sands of years, and many remember the “Great 
Cleansing,” at least well enough to appreciate the 
irony of that name. The Galidyn avoided the 
deadly weaponry of the Fyodoi through natural 
underground shelters not known by the Fyodoi 
and hibernating for a good century or two. Many 
Galidyn still perished, but the vast majority of the 
race survived. Current Galidyn population stands 
at roughly 40,000. 

Nowadays, all attempts to communicate with 
the primitive Fyodoi have proven futile. With all 
records of their past expunged, the Fyodoi con- 
sider the Galidyn to be heinous, technology- 
worshipping monsters. In truth, the Galidyn feel 
sorrow and pity for the Fyodoi, but realize that 
attempts to re-educate them would be wasted, at 
least under the current conditions. 

When a Galidyn takes flight, it is a majestic 
thing, indeed. To the paranoid, superstitious 
Fyodoi, the sight of a flying Galidyn is a terrifying 
omen of death. 

The Galidyn speak the same language as the 
Fyodoi, except that the lizards speak it in its 
purest form, while the Fyodoi speak a corrupted, 
highly altered form of the language. A, Galidyn 
who tries to speak to a Fyodoi runs the-risk of 
having the Human understand only a few.of the 
lizard’s words and misconstrue the intent of the 
conversation (perhaps seeing it as an attempt to 
lure the Human to his doom). 

Galidyns have underground complexes, com- 
plete with many technological devices. These 
communities are located in the mountain ranges 
north of the Roh village. 

The Galidyn reproduce by laying one egg ev- 
ery century. Each young is cared for by its imme- 
diate family, then educated in the Galidyn “school 
system,” usually by an elder Galidyn who teaches 
history, hunting, mathematics, language, aero- 
dynamics, computers and medicine. The species 
has a participatory democracy and all Galidyn 
who complete their instruction successfully can 
participate. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


md TA 
-WA 


Galidyn 
Length: up to 5 meters long 
Height: 2 meters 
DEXTERITY 4D PERCEPTION 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D STRENGTH 6D 
MECHANICAL 1D TECHNICAL 2D 


Armor: 1D 
SpeediCode: 3D, 6D (flying) 
Combat: 
Fangs: 8D 
Roleplaying Hints: The Galidyn are 
rather distressed that the Humans on 
Fyodos have so far declined to communi- 


cate with them. These flying lizards so de- 
sire some intelligent conversation. They 
are gentle when approached politely, but 
fearsome fighters if attacked. 

Quote: “The Humans on our fair planet 
have gone from astarfaring, intelligent race 
to a pack of silly people clad in dead animal 
skins. They seem abnormally fond of carry- 
ing around iron swords, which they pro- 
ceed to stab us with as they run about, 
yelling. When our three moons line up fora 
conjunction, they think it’s some sort of evil 
omen. I surely hope you are not like that. 
Say, do you play holochess?” 


The Imperials remain unaware of the presence 
of Galidyn on the planet. When initial probes and 
scouting parties landed on Fyodos, the Galidyn 
hid themselves and used their sensor-jamming 
equipment to avoid detection. The only encoun- 
ters between Imperials and Galidyn have been 
accidental in nature, and written off by the Em- 
pire as hysteria-induced fiction on the part of 
their personnel. 


Galidyn Society 

The average Galidyn community is comprised 
of a few hundred beings. The communities are 
located at least one kilometer below the planet's 
surface, and consist of caverns filled with 
lightpanels, electronic gear, security alarm sys- 
tems, environmental control systems, geothermal 
power plants, fungus parks, and living quarters 
made of refined metal and plastics.Several commu- 
nities are often united to form a city. Average 
Galidyn population in one of these cities at any 
given time is about 5000. 

There are eight cities, each ruled by a Galidyn 
whose title is “Steward.” The closest city to the 
Roh tribe has a Steward named Ssseeeeseetek, a 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


a 


-z =R Galidyn 


4000-year-old Galidyn who is clearly the oldest, 
strongest and most respected member of the 
species on the planet. 

Any off-worlders spotted with high-tech equip- 
ment will be escorted to an open meeting place 
called the “Crater of Debate,” and asked to ex- 
plain themselves and where they have come 
from. It is very possible that some particularly 
eloquent heroes may be able to convince the 
Galidyn to support the Republic, but the majority 
of the great creatures will not consent to leave 
their planet. Instead, they will vigorously defend 
the planet from any Imperial incursions, as well 
as aid the Republic in setting up a base on one of 
the abandoned continents. (Some Galidyn may 
be persuaded to venture out into space, provid- 
ing they are promised intellectual stimulation 
and problem-solving.) 

Bear in mind that the Galidyn are the truly 
civilized species on the planet. They can boast of 
scientists, physicians, philosophers, technicians 
and the like. 


Galidyn and the Force 
The Galidyn will be absolutely delighted to see 
manifestations of the Force. Their scientists and 
philosophers have debated the existence of an 


Rob Casweil 


“all-encompassing energy field in all things,” but 
have not been able to either prove or disprove its 
existence. 


Lesynn 

DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 1D+1 

Size: 33 centimeters in length, 66-centimeter 

wingspan 

Speed Code: 5D (flying) 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Beak: Str+1D damage 

Combat: Lesynn are not particularly danger- 
ous creatures. While they have been known to 
peck at Fyodoi venturing too close to their nests, 
in most cases they will take to the air rather than 
engage in conflict. 

Using Lesynn in the Roleplaying Game: 
Lesynn are avian creatures, noted for their gor- 
geous golden plumage and delicious meat. They 
nest in the forests of Fyodos, feeding on insects 
and some vegetation. Their song is said to be a 
cry for peace, one that went unheeded during the 
“Great Cleansing.” Now they sing everywhere 
they go to remind the Fyodoi of the beauty that 
can be destroyed by war. 

Most Fyodoi value lesynn for their taste and 
use the feathers for ornamentation. However, a 
small sect who have turned away from their 
shaman now worship the birds, believing them 
to be messengers from the gods. They fiercely 
protect the nests in their territory, even going so 
far as killing their fellow Fyodoi to keep them 
from harming the lesynn. 

The birds themselves are relatively harmless, 
providing their nests and eggs are unmolested. 
They mate once, for life, and females lay two to 
three eggs a year. Lesynn feathers can occasion- 
ally be found on expensive clothing produced in 
years past by the Empire (gleaned from small- 
time traders), but there is no organized effort to 
export the plumage. 

The Fyodoi might not be so enamored of the 
lesynn if they realized that the birds’ favorite 
activity is flying beside Galidyn. The winged liz- 
ards enjoy the company of the avians as well, but 
do their best to keep this friendship a secret, for 
fear the superstitious Fyodoi would exterminate 
the birds if they found out. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are informed by New Republic - 


officials that the Tharak installation may contain 
key information. It is believed that the Empire 
once attempted a biological warfare experiment 


wr 


on nearby Tatrang Ill, and the products of that 
project may still be alive in the poisonous jungle. 
The characters must travel to the Tharak instal- 
lation (hopefully without triggering the alarm) 
and obtain the information. While there, they will 
encounter a Galidyn. 

Should they set off the alarm, the shaman and 
his men will arrive in time to see them in conver- 
sation with the “demonic” lizard. 


Adventure Idea 


The Fyodoi group which worships the lesynn 
have spotted one of the objects of their adoration 
flying with a Galidyn. Far from losing faith in the 
avians, they are instead convinced that the de- 
mons were attempting to tempt the lesynn. 

There can obviously be only one response to 
this: the Galidyn must be exterminated, once and 
for all. They lesynn-worshippers are currently 
trying to convince the rest of the Fyodoi to join 
them in a “holy war” against the lizards. If they 
are successful, Fyodos could be the site of yet 
another bloody conflict. The characters must 
find a way to defuse this situation before hostili- 
ties erupt. 


Adventure Idea 


Afree-trader who landed by accident on Fyodos 
has been imprisoned for attempting to sell a 
blaster pistol to a native and plans are moving 
ahead for his execution. What makes the situa- 
tion even more dire is that the man carries infor- 
mation of value to the New Republic. 

The characters must find a way to extricate 
the free-trader from this situation, either by ne- 
gotiating or breaking him out of the crude Fyodoi 
prison. 


Adventure Idea 


The Imperial scouting report (see sidebar) 
winds up in New Republic hands, and the charac- 
ters are sent to investigate Fyodos, particularly 
these rumors of talking lizards. The mission has 
the feel of a diplomatic venture. 

A possible variation on this theme could be 
that the characters themselves find the report, 
perhaps with a drunken scout, trader, or even a 
pirate. This would be especially useful if the 
characters are not actively involved with the 
New Republic. 


Adventure Idea 
While just passing by this system, the charac- 
ters’ ship picks up the planetside blip, which 
resembles a landing transponder code. The curi- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


A Rc VOdO 


-WA 


osity factor present is that the ship’s Nav com- 
puter has a planet listing of “low-tech retrograde 
civilization” for Fyodos. 


Adventure Idea 


Fyodos can be a great place to have the char- 
acters’ ship break down, or have some ship that 
is being pursued by the characters go down here. 
In either case, a forced landing on the Tharak 
continent could prove interesting. The landing 
pad transponder will be one of the primary sig- 
nals picked up by the stricken ship, and may fool 
the characters into thinking that there is an 
advanced civilization on this planet. 


Adventure Idea 


Aseemingly addled eccentric scientist wishes 
to hire the characters to take him to Fyodos. He 
is ascholar of dead civilizations. Unknown to the 
characters, he is also an Imperial lackey and 
carries a long-range homing device. If he finds 
anything of great importance, he will call in Impe- 
rial help. (Apparently, the Empire was not so 
quick to dismiss their initial scout’s report.) 


Adventure Idea 


Once on the planet, the characters, if be- 
friended by the Fyodoi, could be told exagger- 
ated stories about the great flying lizards and 


their alleged atrocities against the Fyodoi. The 
characters will be approached and persuaded to 
join the hunt. 

In fact, either the Fyodoi corner a wounded 
lizard, which attempts to speak, or the Galidyn 
wipe out the party, saving the characters for last. 


Adventure Idea 


This adventure should be used if the charac- 
ters befriend a Fyodoi chief. The party incurs the 
jealousy of the shaman. Since he recognizes tech- 
nology, he attempts to trick the party into reveal- 
ing their items. Such attempts may include herd- 
ing wild animals in the characters’ direction, or 
having someone feign illness and see if the char- 
acters use modern medicine. If the characters 
reveal technological items, the items will be de- 
stroyed and the characters seized and forced to 
undergo trial by combat. 


Adventure Idea 


The Galidyn, who know of the presence of 
“something big and disturbing” under the 
Deathmoon base, alert the characters to some 
eventual danger to the planet. There should bea 
tough time in getting down the crevasse where 
the missiles are located, most likely with the use 
of climbing skill. Disarming the missile system 
requires a Very Difficult demolitions skill roll. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


49 


Gacerian 


Gacerian 


System Summary 


The Gacerian system consists of six planets 
orbiting an orange star called Klozar. Of the half 
dozen planets in the system, only Gacerian and 
Alc have any sort of breathable atmosphere. Alc 
has yet to be explored, as current geological re- 
ports show that the expense of settling would far 
outweigh any profit to be made from the natural 
resources present there. 

Gacerian’s two airless moons, Tempay and 
Fortay, orbit the planet once every 37.5 days. The 
moons are in opposition: located 180 degrees from 
each other, they are always on opposite sides of 
the planet. 

The Empire has recently established a small 
base on Tempay. While no great effort has been 
made to keep this a secret, it is not exactly 
common knowledge in the area. Since it occurred 
amere few months ago, word of its construction 
has not gotten around yet. 

The precious stones of Gacerian are the main 
reason the Empire is here. The stones are mined 
by the citizens, anda hefty percentageis willingly 
turned over to the Empire. 

The most important Imperial presence on the 
planet is the Imperial Governor, his staff of 12, 
and his 24 stormtrooper bodyguards. 


A Planet of Sand 


Gacerian is a hot desert planet with two main 
continents, Elto and An-Elto, plus a small archi- 
pelago. Most of the citizenry live in the capital 
city of Harmonia (in fact, Harmonia is the only 
city on the planet). 

Due to the planet's very low axial tilt, there are 
no seasonal variations. The orange sun is so 
intense that the daytime temperature reaches 30 
degrees Centigrade at high noon. When the sun 
sets, the temperature plummets to five degrees 
Centigrade. 


System Datafile 


Gacerian system, star: Klozar, orange star. Six planets in 
system; one terrestrial planet, Gacerian, fourth fromthe sun. 
High-tech, near-human civilization. Music and leisure are 


largest planetary industries. High demand for luxury goods 

and foodstuffs. Possible Imperial presence in system. 
Please take some time to learn the social customs of 

Gacerian during your stay. It will show your good manners. 


ARN 
ARS 


There are strong winds on Gacerian, which 
make desert travelling a hazard. Difficult survival 
rolls are required when crossing the desert. Ifthe 
characters do not come froma desert planet and/ 
or have never had to attempt survival in a desert, 
the task becomes Very Difficult. The winds are 
most common around dawn and dusk, when the 
air is either heating up or cooling down. 


Gacerites 


Gacerites average 2.5 meters in height, and are 
thin humanoids with spindly limbs. They are 
completely hairless. Gacerite eyes are tiny, in 
order to protect their optic nerves from their 
sun’s glare. Their ears, however, are huge and 
exceptionally keen. 

The most unusual physiological feature of the 
Gacerites is their respiratory system. In addition 
to having a highly efficient pair of lungs (the 
better to breathe the thin air of Gacerian with), 
Gacerites have a second set of air-intake holes, 
located on their necks, right below the jaw. These 
breathing holes are attached to a third lung. 
Gacerites make music with these “gills,” which 
means that they can breathe normally and sing 
without having to pause for breath. 

Gacerites live in family units, though their 
word for family translates more as “ensemble,” 
as ina musical group. All children are raised with 
musical training. 

Music and etiquette are the way of life for the 
Gacerites, and all aspects of their culture reflect 
this. In fact, the Gacerite courtship ritual, a series 
of songs and mannerisms, can take upwards of 10 
years to complete. Fortunately, Gacerites have a 
life span of 150 years. 

The average Gacerite loves music and the 
freedom of expression that it brings. On the other 
hand, music is made up of notes played to a 
certain rhythm. Everyone in an orchestra must 
know their part and when to play it. As a result, 
the Gacerites have also developed a love of disci- 
pline and order. This carries over into their sys- 
tem of etiquette. 

Unfortunately, the mixture of the artist’s cre- 
ative mind and the strictness of order make fora 
rather bad social combination, especially when 
it comes to government. Thus, the Empire has 
assigned a governor to rule the planet. Gacerites 
are rabidly pro-Imperial, since the Empire stands 
for order, and each player must play his part. 


.50 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


_—— A | 
—_ ——— ae A 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Name Planet Profile 
Gacerian Desert 


Type: Terrestrial 

Hydrosphere: Dry 

Gravity: Light 

Length of Day: 36 Standard Hours 
Length of Year: 375 Local Days 
Sapient Species: Gacerites (N) 


Points of Interest: The Musical Rocks, the Singing 


Starport: Stellar 
Population: 27 million 


Government: Imperial Government 

Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: Musical entertainment, gemstones 
Major Imports: Foodstuffs, luxury goods 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Gacerian 


Klozar Star Type: 
ORBITAL BODIES 


Desolate Searing Rock 


Orange 


Star Name: 
Desolate Searing Rock 


[Name | 

Tun 

Wei 

Alc Steaming Jungle 
Tytun Gas Giant 


Rie | Frigid Rock Planet 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Western 
Hemisphere 


World Summary 


Gacerian is a hot desert world of stark beauty. It has 
very little in the way of remarkable geological features, 
but the few it does possess are rather unique. 

The planet is a frequent rest stop for traders and 
travellers, especially those seeking tranquility or 
those recovering from severe injuries, be they physi- 
cal or mental. What the vast majority of travellers are 
unaware ofis the existence of an Imperial base on one 
of Gacerian’s moons. The planet is run by an Imperial 
governor, since the Gacerites have demonstrated 
their incompetence at self-rule. 

Gacerian is also known for its high-quality gem- 
stones. The Gacerites mine them using the most 
advanced known sonic mining equipment. This is 
probably the most manual labor done by the delicate 
Gacerites. 

Gacerian has always been an Imperial-aligned 
planet. 


51 


Cathleen Hunter 


In terms of language, the Gacerites speak in 
musical tones. The higher the key, the happier 
the words. Things like war, death, sadness, and 
displeasure are conveyed by low bass notes and 
dirge-like melodies. In fact, it is rumored that, 
prior to his death, Emperor Palpatine had a fond- 
ness for Gacerite dirge opera. k 

Gacerite manners are excruciatingly precise 
and their social rites are complex and feature 
long-winded orations. Thereis a certain etiquette 
to everything, and each occasion has its own 
rules and regulations regarding what constitutes 
standard behavior. Though the Gacerites make it 
a point to learn the customs and etiquette of 
other races, this is usually reserved for their 
dealings off-planet. When on Gacerian, the 
Gacerites expect visitors who have been exposed 
to their society to at least make the attempt to 
conform to their mannerisms. 


Gacerite Society 


The Gacerites have a classless society which 
revolves around music and manners. Social cus- 
toms are tightly regulated and enforced. Politeness 
is the most valued trait of all, even if it means telling 
a few white lies or indulging in false modesty. 

It is easy to mistake the Gacerite’s excessive 


Gacerite 


Rob Casweil 


courtesy for cowardice. Nothing could be further 
from the truth. Despite their pleasant demeanor 
and near grovelling attitudes, Gacerites are fear- 
some in warfare. Their armies are well-disci- 
plined, and are most receptive to the martial 
music played by the unit Musicmakers. In fact, 
when the Aria Callet‘dira is played, Gacerite sol- 
diers erupt into a battle frenzy as the music stirs 
their passions. 

The pleasing Gacerite melodies attract many 
music lovers from all over the galaxy, enough so 
that the Gacerites have been able to turn their 
music into a thriving industry. In fact, sound and 
the sense of hearing are venerated above every- 
thing else here. Silence is equated with death. On 
the other hand, loud, grating noises or atonal 
music is considered the equivalent of swearing. 

As for etiquette, Gacerites pride themselves 
on knowing the manners of most known cultures 
— the more exotic the manners, the more inter- 
ested the Gacerites become. Gacerites make ex- 
cellent translators and dipomatic aides. Many 
travellers who own 3PO units seek out Gacerite 
programmers to improve their Droids. 

In addition, the Gacerites have mastered the 
science of sound, and use sound-based weapons 
to stun opponents, kill enemies, or even level 
buildings. Of course, these weapons are useless 
in space, which is where the Imperials take over 
and defend Gacerite vessels, in return for contin- 
ued Gacerite obedience. 

Culture and songs are taught to Gacerites 
from infancy. Many Gacerites have special songs 
which they sing whenever they get into certain 
moods. For instance, a Gacerite may have a song 
for happiness, one for fear, and one for hunger. 

As mentioned before, the Gacerites are ex- 
tremely poor at governing themselves. The Impe- 
rial Governor meets once every Gacerian week 
with a group of Gacerites and goes over routine 
matters. It is part of Gacerite society to respect 
the Empire, which includes reporting all sus- 
pected New Republic members to the Governor, 
who in turn calls in reinforcements from the 
moon base. 


Harmonia 


The only city on Gacerian, Harmonia, and its 
accompanying starport take up an area of 520 
square kilometers. Most of the city is made up of 
tall, glistening spires of crystal that vibrate from 
the offshore breezes, setting up a beautiful reso- 
nating music. The orange sunlight reflecting 
through translucent portions of the crystal buiid- 
ings produces brilliant colors. 

The Imperial Governor rules from and lives in 
Harmonia. An atmospheric shuttle runs from 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


oe AR GCE 
BST 


-WA 


Harmonia to places such as the gem mines, the 
Musical Rocks and the Singing Forest. Theshuttles 
depart every four hours. 


The Imperial Governor 


Ulbrek Gostech is the Empire’s representative 
and the Imperial Governor of Gacerian. The 
Gacerians willingly awarded him the title of 
Gacer'grocinga, meaning “leader of artists”. He is 
a popular leader. He is the first Imperial repre- 
sentative to hold the title, and has been in charge 
for the past seven years. (Fortunately, he is a 
music lover.) 

Although Gostech scrupulously adheres to 
Imperial policy, his rule of Gacerian is actually 
quite fair. Gostech is smart enough to know that, 
especially when dealing with a manners-con- 
scious race such as the Gacerites, using the kind 
and fair approach yields better results than an 
iron hand could. Of course, if things did get out of 
control, Gostech could always resort to the iron 
hand, and would do so without the slightest 
hesitation or regret. 


Ulbrek Gostech 
Imperial Governor of Gacerian 
Species: Human 


Height: 1.5 meters Sex: Male 
DEXTERITY 1D+2 

Hold-out blaster 3D, dodge 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 6D 


Alien races 6D, bureaucracy 7D, culture 
7D, Imperial law 8D, languages 7D, 


Gacerites 
Height: 2.5 meters 
DEXTERITY 1D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 


PERCEPTION 3D+2 
STRENGTH 1D 


MECHANICAL ID TECHNICAL 2D+1 
Skill Notes: All Gacerites have at least 1D 
in the following Knowledge skills: alien races, 
bureaucracy, cultures, and languages. 
Roleplaying Hints: Gacerites are ex- 
tremely polite and scrupulously well-be- 


haved. Gacerites communicate a variety of 
ways, including in a sing-song voice, through 
a series of whistles, or even by humming a 
melody. 

Quote: “Would you please, if it is not too 
much trouble, please consider dropping 
your weapons? It is improper to point weap- 
onry at your hosts, especially when they _ 
have more weapons pointed at you than 
you do at them, Your cooperation is appre- 
ciated.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Gacerite Weapons 


The following is a list of Gacerite weap- 
ons, presented in the same format as those 
listed in the Star Wars Sourcebook. Weap- 
ons with a parenthetical entry under Dam- 
age can be used to inflict stun damage, 


requiring a simple change of a setting. 
Weapon Where Cost Damage 


Sound Pistol 3F 800 5D+1 (4D) 
Sound Rifle 3R 1400 6D+1 (5D) 


Sonic 


Grenade 3X 300 6D (5D) 


planetary systems 8D, streetwise 6D+1 

MECHANICAL 3D 

PERCEPTION 5D 

Command 8D, con 9D 

STRENGTH 1D+1 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Description: Gostech is a portly man with 
beady eyes and short black hair. He dresses the 
part of Imperial Governor, in full regalia. 

Objectives: To run Gacerian efficiently, and 
gain a reputation as an excellent administrator 
and a tough enforcer of Imperial law. 

Background: Gostech’s career in the Empire 
has been one characterized by steady compe- 
tence. Though fanatically loyal to the Empire, it 
was felt that his “soft touch” methods would not 
get him far. Still, the Emperor did not want to 
waste the man's talents on some meaningless 
job. When the need came for an Imperial Gover- 
nor fora planet of docile artists who were loyal to 
the Empire, Palaptine knew the perfect man for 
the job — Gostech. 

Personality: Gostech is a man of culture and 
taste. He does not lose his temper easily nor 
react too quickly to any situation. Even when 
confronted by New Republic prisoners, Gostech 
is usually civil to them, unless the prisoners 
caused a huge amount of damage and loss of 
Imperial lives in the system. 

Gostech is curious about the workings of what 
he calls the “criminal mind,” and will even invite 
New Republic prisoners to dine with him and 
explain their motivations. Of course, ifthey should 
let slip some vital information about the New 
Republic, especially after the tenth glass of 
Corellian whiskey, then so much the better. 

Gostech is also aware of his rivals’ beliefs that 
he is not tough enough. In order to show his 
superiors that he is not soft-hearted, he has 
executed Republic prisoners and ordered harsh 


Gacerian 


i 


AR= 
ARS 


GACERIAN DIAGRAM 
Typical Gacerian Gem Mines 


Worker 
Barracks 


Stormtrooper 
Barracks 


Administration 
Building 


Gate Fence 


imprisonment for any Gacerites who have been 
found guilty of treason. 
Equipment: Comlink, hold-out blaster (3D+1) 
Quote: “A kind word and a smile often gets 
better results than a harsh word. But a kind word 
and an electroprod always gets better results 
than a kind word and a smile.” 


The Musical Rocks 


Also called Oueee-ha in the Gacerite language, 
the Musical Rocks are a group of boulders on the 
Plateau of Dreams, a huge formation in the middle 
of the Elto continent. 

The rocks got their name from the eerie music 
that is produced when the wind blows through 
them. Many Gacerites come here to meditate, 
and this is the closest thing in the Gacerite cul- 
ture to a religious shrine. 

Unfortunately, the Musical Rocks often attract 
wild animals, who pose a threat to unwary tour- 
ists and pilgrims. 


The Singing Forest 
Translated as Keee-s’ae in Gacerian, the Sing- 
ing Forest is made up of a dense area of s’ae trees. 
The s’ae tree trunks get as wide as 12 meters at 


the base, and the average tree height is 100 
meters. Since this area is close to the southern 
polar region, the temperature is cooler and more 
moisture is found in the air, allowing the huge 
trees to thrive. 

As opposed to the Musical Rocks and the 
spires of Harmonia, both of which make music 
because of the wind, the s'ae trees in the Singing 
Forest are sensitive to seismic activity. The slight- 
est shift in the bedrock, a movement so slight 
that the average person cannot detect it, causes 
the trees to resonate like a forest of tuning forks. 

In the direct center of the Forest is aspring-fed 
lake. This is a popular area for swimmers to take 
their ease. 


The Gem Mines 


Each gem mine is staffed by 110 Gacerties, 100 
of whom do the mining and 10 who handle admin- 
istrative duties. In addition, there are 20 Imperial 
stormtroopers stationed at each mine, ostensi- 
bly to protect the workers from wild animals and 
off-world gem thieves. The stormtroopers have 
been warned not to abuse the Gacerites, since 
they are working in the mine as normal paid 
workers, not as slaves. 


54 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Cathleen Hunter 


i T AR GACEN 


At any given mine, there is a two in six chance 
of there being 3D off-worlder miners here as 
prisoners, usually being held on smuggling or 
low-level piracy charges. In such instances, the 
number of stormtroopers present is doubled. 

Each minealso has an administrative building, 
an airshuttle landing field, workers’ barracks, 
stormtrooper barracks, plus a motorpool con- 
taining six landspeeders, 12 military speeder 
bikes, and one cargo skiff. 


Revirs 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Size: 1.5 meters in length, 1 meter at the 
shoulder 
Speed Code: 3D 
Scale: Creature 
Attacks: 
Howl: 6D damage per round, 100 m range 
Claws: 3D 
Teeth: 4D 
Combat: Revirs use their howl to bring down 
prey before consuming it. The revir howl will do 
6D damage to anyone within a 100 meter radius of 
the animal. Earplugs provide 2D protection; a 
helmet 1D. The revir can sustain the howl for up 
to five rounds. It then must rest a round before 
howling again. Damage will be done each round 
the revir sings. 


SS 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Using Revirs in the Roleplaying Game: Revirs 
are Carnivorous mammals who haunt the moun- 
tains of Gacerian, as well as the fringes of its 
deserts. They most closely resemble wolves and 
are covered in a glossy ebon coat of fur. 

Although they do possess nasty claws and 
teeth, the revirs primarily rely on their piercing 
howl to disable enemies. The pitch of the howl 
can bealtered to act as a signal to members of the 
pack over distances as great as one kilometer. 

Revirs hunt in packs of 2D. While some have 
been known to be man-eaters, they generally con- 
tent themselves with prey animals. It can, how- 
ever, be most unwise to wander into the mountains 
at night, as hungry revirs have been known to make 
mistakes. 

The revir’s howl is considered to be the most 
fearsome sound on Gacerian. On a planet where 
music is revered, the idea of asong being used to 
destroy is abhorrent. For that reason, revirs are 
often hunted. Their pelts decorate the homes of 
those who have survived such expeditions. 


Mears 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Missile weapons 4D+1 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Climbing/jumping 4D 
Size: 2.5 meters in length, 2 meters at the 
shoulder 


Mike Vilardi 


Gacerian 


Speed Code: 2D (running) 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Horns: 5D, range 3-10/11-30/31-100 
Hooves: 4D 

Combat: Mears essentially rely on their horns 
and their hooves in combat. However, their 
hooves are only of use in close-in battles — and 
as their primary enemy are the revirs, who can 
fell a foe at long range, evolution forced the them 
to develop a ranged weapon. 

Mears are capable of shooting their horns at 
an enemy. The first set of horns fired will be 
replaced immediately by a new set — however, 
should these be used also, the mear will have to 
wait roughly a week for new pair to grow in. 

In close-range combat, the mears will rear up 
on their two hind limbs and attack with all four 
others. 

Using Mears in the Roleplaying Game: Mears 
are six-legged herbivorous mammals who make 
their homes in the mountains. They live on what 
little vegetation grows among the peaks, often 
venturing to the highest passes in search of some 
greenery. Mears are excellent climbers. 

Mears normally travel in groups of 1D. They 
are frequently preyed upon by revirs and a mear 
season exists on the planet, to allow hunters to 
keep the population under control. Mear meat is 
a staple of many diets on Gacerian. 


AR. 
ARS 


AWAY A 


The Tempay Imperial Base 


The Gacerite moon of Tempay is host to an 
Imperial scout base. Constructed several months 
ago, the base is not yet common knowledge. 

Tempay always shows the same side to 
Gacerian, so the base is located on the north 
pole, at the terminus point between light and 
darkness. This way, base personnel can keep 
tabs on both the planet and on space beyond the 
system. 

The base is commanded by Captain Engar Ret, 
an Imperial Navy officer who is at odds with 
Governor Gostech. Captain Ret covets the 
governor’s position, and is always alert for any 
signs of weakness in order to report it to the 
Empire. Actually, the way Ret has planned it, he 
will win either way. Either Gostech will not be 
hard enough on the Gacerites, in which case the 
governor will be replaced, or Gostech will be too 
harsh, causing an uprising, which Ret will be 
there to quell. After ending a rebellion, Ret would 
file a report indicating that Gostech cannot even 
control his own population of supposedly loyal 
Imperial citizens. 

The base’s complement consists of: 


40 Stormtroopers 

32 TIE Pilots 

32 Ground Crew Technicians 
12 Controllers 


56 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Mike Vilardi 


— T Sa Gacerian 
Rp S 


-WA 


12 Sensor Technicians 

24 Gunners/Weapons Technicians 

20 Imperial Intelligence Officers 

50 Base Security/Detention Troops 

One squadron of TIE fighters (12) 

One squadron of TIE/re reconnaissance (12) 
20 miscellaneous vehicles 


Any New Republic prisoners captured on 
Gacerian are sent to the moon in Gacerite light 
freighters manned by Imperial forces. 


Adventure idea 


A New Republic Senator has vanished en route 
to a conference. The last transmission from his 
vessel put it in the vicinity of the Gacerian sys- 
tem. From all indications, it appeared that the 
trip was proceeding normally. The characters 
are sent to Gacerian to look into the disappear- 
ance and hopefully rescue her. 

The Senator, named Ala Cornin, is being held 
under house arrest in the Imperial Governor's 
crystal tower. Two days after the characters land, 
shewill betransferred to a freighter and brought to 
the moon base for further interrogation. 


Adventure Idea 


A variant of the previous idea. Several promi- 
nent figures in New Republic politics and industry 
have disappeared in recent weeks. They were last 
seen at Harmonia’s poshest hotel. 

What has happened is that these important 
guests have been kidnapped from their rooms and 
sent to the moon base. To add to the drama, a Star 
Destroyer is due soon in-system to pick up the 
prisoners and take them into the heart of Imperial 
space. 


Adventure Idea 


(This is a good one for greedy players.) While 
drinking in a cantina on some planet, the charac- 
ters hear a grizzled prospector talking about a 
place where “you can just walk around and pick the 
gems off the dirt!” The coordinates he gives are for 
Gacerian. 

This is a scam. The grizzled prospector is Dek 
Anorik, a smuggler who was captured, along with 
his best friend, by the Imperial forces on Gacerian. 
In exchange for his freedom, Dek is to assume the 
guise of an old prospector and try to lure Rebels 
and free-traders to Gacerian, in order to have them 
put to workin the gem mines. His friend remains on 
the planet in order to assure Dek’s cooperation. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


57 


System Summary 


The Korbin system contains a large number of 
planets, with most of them of little use to 
starfarers. Four of the planets in the system, 
Beneris, Tollero, Lynaria, and Altrax, are inca- 
pable of supporting life and have no resources to 
speak of. Only the third, fourth, and fifth planets, 
known respectively as Amrap, Torvix, and Korbin, 
are habitable. 

The sixth orbit is occupied by Grillis, an aster- 
oid belt, which supports some light mining under 
the aegis of Cross-Galactic Mining, a mid-level 
sized corporation that has mines scattered ona 
dozen worlds. The seventh world is the gas giant 
Abatrang, with its poisonous ammonia atmo- 
sphere. 

All in all, the system is a lawless dangerous 
place. The Empire and the New Republic agree on 
one thing: anyone who goes to Korbin and gets 
into trouble deserves everything he gets. 


Weather and Geography 


Korbin has no axial tilt, which results in no 
seasonal variations. However, the orange sun is 
very strong and heats things up quickly. Daytime 
temperatures get as high as 35 degrees Centi- 
grade. When the sun sets, the temperature plum- 
mets to as low as five degrees below zero Centi- 
grade. 

What rainfall there is normally begins at dusk 
and lasts for 1D hours. On exceedingly rare occa- 
sions, Korbin sees snow. 

A huge mountain range girdles the planet. The 
high peaks are often covered in ice and snow and 
howling winds whip around them, making the 
going even moretreacherous. The only safemeans 
of travel through the mountains are the two 
passes, Selenfer (linking the cities of Pleasant 
and Happy), and Refin (linking Joy and Peace). 


System Datafile 


Atrig system, star : Atrig, large orange sun. Nine planet 
system. Main terrestrial planet Korbin, principal industry, 
mining. Black markets in weaponry, ships, and other equip- 


ment exist on the planet. 

TRAVELLER’S ADVISORY: The Atrig system is not under 
any political jurisdiction. Anarchy reigns on Korbin. Pro- 
ceed at your own risk! 


However, the passes have dangers of their own, 
as bandits often lurk there waiting to ambush 
travellers. 


Redeye 
Korbin’s sole moon, Redilos was long ago 
christened “Redeye” by the planet’s occupants. 
The huge moon hangs close to the planet — if 
Korbin had oceans, the tides would be horrific. 
Redeye is an intimidating sight, a huge blood- 
red disk, pock-marked with craters and ridges. 
Redeyeis barren, and has no resources to speak of. 


A World to Beware 


The planet Korbin played host to a thriving 
mining industry for centuries under the Old Re- 
public. Though the population was never very 
big, it was a productive, industrious place. 

But long before the fall of the Republic, Korbin’s 
resources began to dwindle, with veins of ore 
becoming harder and harder to find. It soon 
became evident that the expenses involved in 
getting the ore out of the ground dwarfed the 
income generated by its sale. The planet’s lim- 
ited resources would not support terraforming 
into an agricultural planet, and tourists were not 
interested in vacationing in old mine shafts. 
Slowly, the population left for better prospects 
on other planets. 

Eventually, the only people left were some 
struggling miners working for a few small corpo- 
rations. Anearby system with overcrowded pris- 
ons asked for the Old Republic’s permission to 
resettle 200 dangerous prisoners on Korbin. The 
Republic agreed, and the prisoners were settled 
on Korbin and made to earn their keep by work- 
ing in the mines. 

At this point, most of the honest workers left, 
concerned about how long they would last work- 
ing side by side with murderers and psycho- 
paths. As the years went by, more planets sent 
their felons to Korbin. In time, fugitives, dregs of 
society, and other lowlifes began flocking to the 
planet in droves, usingit as arefuge from the law. 

It soon became apparent that the inmates 
were running the prison, but the Republic did not 
have the iniative to get involved — other, more 
important, matters were at hand. The felons 
were confined to the Atrig system, and the few 
corporations left on Korbin gave the whole ar- 
rangement a touch of legitimacy. 


58 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Type 
Temperate Plains 


Planet Name 
Korbin 
Type: Terrestrial 


Atmosphere: Type l (Breathable) 
Hydrosphere: Dry 

Gravity: Standard 

Terrain: Scrub, urban 

Length of Day: 28 Standard Hours 
Length of Year: 380 Local Days 


Sapient Species: Human (N) 
Points of Interest: Asteroid Mining, Pleasant City 


TIRA Ge ae) 
ee ee SS 
—————— 


Major Exports: Mining, kyrf 
Major Imports: Thieves and degenerates 


SYSTEM DATA 
System Name: Atrig 


Star Name: Atrig Star Type: Orange 


ORBITAL BODIES 
Planet Type 


Searing Rock 


Searing Rock 
Swamp 
Terrestrial 
Asteroid Belt 


Frozen Rock 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Eastern 


{=D Valley Hemisphere 


iisi Major 
Mountain 


z a A 
orbin Equato 
IA ARININ AA 


Western 
Hemisphere 


World Summary 


Korbin is an excruciatingly hot planet with very 
little to justify its continued existence. Formerly a 
successful mining colony, the veins of ore have long 
been played out. What remains barely keeps the 
planet's economy going. The planet’s secondary in- 
dustry is the growing of a certain fruit that is used to 
make a potent alcoholic beverage, but its primary 
money-maker is a thriving black market in everything. 

The planet has no surface oceans. Water is found 
in small quantities in underground pools and reser- 
voirs. The terrain is mostly flat scrub plains, with a 
few small mountain ranges and valleys to break up 
the monotony. 

Korbin is the last stop for many in the galaxy whose 
fortunes and scruples have dwindled to nothing. The 
Korbinsystem is located far enough away from normal 
Imperial routes and patrols that the Empire sees no 
point in going in and cleaning the place up. 

Planetary government is non-existent. Chaos and 
anarchy reign. Korbin has never professed loyalty to 
either the Empire or the New Republic, and the Battle 
of Endor changed nothing as far as the planet's occu- 
pants were concerned. 


59 


Stephen Crane 


Even the corporations themselves got into the 
act, by sending their most bothersome, irritat- 
ing, and incompetent executives and employees 
to Korbin. In an atmosphere where the rules had 
ceased to matter, many of these corporates be- 
gan making a profit on the side by selling goods 
at vastly inflated prices. This was the start of 
what is now a thriving black market on Korbin. 

With no central government on the planet to 
watch for smugglers, the transport of goods that 
are illegal in other systems is acknowledged and 
encouraged here. Korbin is well known among 
free-traders and pirates as the place where they 
can obtain anything, for a price: weapons and 
other personal equipment, forged identification, 
Imperial seals of safe conduct, even ships, all can 
be found somewhere onthe planet. (Expect prices 
for these items to betwo to three times that listed 
in the Star Wars Sourcebook — the sellers are, 
after all, criminals and swindlers.) 


Pleasant City Encounter Chart 
Encounter 


Characters witness a blaster fight between 
1D+1 city dwellers. 

Characters witness a brawl with melee 
weapons, between 2D city dwellers. 
Characters witness a small conflict with 
heavy weaponry between 3D city dwellers. 
1D of natives amble up to the characters 
and offer to sell them services of some 
kind (gamemaster’s choice). 

2D natives are doing some gambling on the 
street. Characters may feel free to join in. 


A native comes up to the characters and 
offers to sell them something (game- 
master’s choice). 


A group of 2D natives attempts to mug the 
characters. 


A madman rushes up to the party and 
claims to be someone important (e.g. a 
New Republic spy, Imperial official, Jedi 
Knight). 

Someone from an upstairs apartment 
dumps garbage on the characters. 

A big, ugly, drunk, well-armed alien mis- 
takes one of the characters for its worst 
enemy. (Gamemaster option: Alien mis- 
takes character for its girlfriend.) 


Korbin Society 

Korbin has only one law: “The one with the 
biggest blaster makes the rules.” Despite this 
edict, there is a “rough justice;” often, a gang of 
Korbinites will gang up on someone they feel has 
done a little too much rule-making. Therefore, 
survival on this world requires knowing when to 
be aggressive and when to hold back. Many 
Korbinites die trying to learn this lesson. 

The best summation of Korbin law is that 
there is no Korbin law. Everyone does whatever 
they please, though even some ofthe worst dregs 
know that running around and destroying every- 
thing is a sure way to get one’s throat slit. But 
there is no weapon, no pastime, no substance, no 
thought or idea, that is considered illegal. In 
some ways, Korbin can be said to havea perfectly 
integrated society with no bias whatsoever. Ev- 
eryone distrusts and dislikes everyone else. 


Pleasant City 


All of the cities of Korbin were deliberately 
given cheery names as a cruel joke. Pleasant City 
is the largest urban area and home to the Korbin 
Starport. There are no customs inspections at 
the starport, which should come as no surprise. 

In addition, the Pleasant City starport has no 
truly qualified mechanics. Characters can rent a 
berth for their vessel and conduct their own 
repairs. Naturally, Pleasant City will not be held 
responsible for any break-ins or vandalism done 
to the ship while it is berthed. 

The buildings of Pleasant City are a 
tumbledown collection of prefabricated houses 
and old stone structures. Many of the buildings 
show signs of efforts at repair having been made, 
but such renovations are half-completed, as if 
the laborers simply lost interest. 

Theairis hot and dusty, and smells of garbage, 
sweat, and some minor industrial emissions. 
There are few children, and most of them are 
free-running ruffians. Korbin is not where one 
goes to start a family. 

Since hygiene is not a major priority, diseases 
are common. For each day spent in Pleasant City, 
each character must make an Easy roll against 
their Strength, or else contract an airborne dis- 
ease, virus, or plague (gamemaster’s discretion 
as to damage). 

All equipment found in the Star Wars 
Sourcebook can be found in Pleasant City. There 
are no restrictions on legality codes or licenses, 
but prices are high, as noted above. Whenever 
an item is purchased, the gamemaster should 
secretly roll 2D: On the result of a “2,” the item 
bought is flawed, and will break down at the most 


60 


Pianets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


= TA 
-WA 


inconvenient time. On a “12,” the item never 
works, period. Since most “stores” have at least 
oneviolence-loving bouncer, refunds areunlikely 
(always assuming that the character is still alive 
to ask for one). 

What Pleasant City does have is a huge variety 
of alien species among its residents. Practically 
every known species is represented here, and 
they mix freely. For every ten minutes in which 
the characters are walking the streets of Pleasant 
City, roll 3D and consult the “Pleasant City En- 
counter Chart.” 


Jedi Knights, the Force, and Korbin 


Jedi Knights without any traces of the Dark 
Side will stick out in Korbinite society like Darth 
Vader in a field of Imperial stormtroopers. The 
power, serenity, and honor of the Jedi Knights is 
practically a tangible thing in this pit of evil, 
corruption, despair, and dishonor. This will ei- 
ther cause the natives to give the character a 
wide, fearful berth, or get cocky and indignant 
and try to pick a fight with the character. 


Korbin Careers 


There are a number of occupations available 
to the aspiring Korbinite. The following list cov- 
ers some of them, and is useful for gamemasters 
to consult when trying to create encounters. 

Miner — There are not many of these left, as 
most of the mines are played out. They are looked 
down upon by the unsavory elements on the 
planet, most of whom have never done a day’s 
honest labor in their lives. 

Asteroid Miners — These are the people who 
toil in the corporate mines in the asteroid belts. 
The procedure for a worker is 38 days of work on 
an asteroid, followed by 19 days off on Korbin. 

Scavengers — Armed with a ship and protec- 
tive suits, these vultures travel the system, loot- 
ing any vessels that might crash on one of the 
worlds (see below). 

Gangs — Organized groups of criminals, each 
gang led by a crime boss. Many gangs have 
rivalries. This is by far the most well-represented 
occupation on the planet, since most gangs also 
dabble in the black market. Gangs also account 
for most of the robberies and protection rackets 
operating on Korbin. 

Black Marketeers — Sellers of both legal and 
illegal goods abound on Korbin. Most do their 
best to avoid violent confrontation, as it’s bad for 
business. 

Mercenaries— Professional soldiers who hire 
themselves out as muscle. They are the most 
reliable folks on Korbin, and will keep their word 
when working for someone, providing they are 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


agl 
ELAT 


WN 
\ 
i 


well paid to do so. 

Pirates — Organized gangs with space-going 
capability, they prowl around both within and 
outside the system, waiting to attack unwary 
vessels. The scavengers make much of their in- 
come simply by shadowing the pirates and steal- 
ing whatever they leave behind. 


The Last Call 


As might be expected, life is “nasty, brutal and 
short” on Korbin. Some way of disposing of all of 
the victims had to be found, and quickly, before 
the cities grew more diseased than they already 
were. The natives settled upon the idea of “Last 
Call.” 

A huge valley 700 meters deep, the floor of 
“Last Call” is littered with the remains of 
Korbinites and foolish off-worlders. Fortunately, 


é aN 
S intl ih 


j 
| 


61 


Korbin 


Mike Vilardi 


Korbin 


the prevailing winds blow to the north, sweeping 
away any possible unpleasantness. 


The Small-Timers 


Korbin's cities are connected by a system of 
roads, but these are rarely travelled, as the cities 
do not often trade with each other. Each city 
keeps to itself. Besides Pleasant City, the other 
cities are Happy, Joy, and Peace. Collectively, the 
three smaller cities are known as Small-Timers. 

Life in the Small-Timers is similar to Pleasant 
City, only less intense. Also, the mines are located 
on the outskirts of Pleasant City, so there are fewer 
hard-working people in the Small-Timers. 


The Kyrf Plantation 


Besides a smattering of mining and the black 
market, Korbin is known for an alcoholic bever- 
age called kyrf, which is derived from the fruit of 
the same name. Kyrf only grows in one area of 
Korbin, and that area is a plantation owned by a 
less than honest Korbinite, Drelmar Bin. 

Kyrf itself is an extremely flavorful and quite 
powerful drink. A Human drinking one glass of 
kyrf needs to make a Very Easy Strength roll in 
order to avoid the intoxicating effects. Every 
additional glass requires another Strength roll, 
but at the next highest level of difficulty. 

Beings drunk on kyrf start misspeaking and 


slurring words, then lose their coordination, then 
lose consciousness. Those who fail a Strength roll 
by 10 or more go straight to unconsciousness. 

Korbinites love kyrf, because it enables them 
to escape into oblivion for a while. The effects 
last for 2D hours. 

Located a mere 10 kilometers northeast of 
Pleasant City, Drelmar Bin’s kyrf plantation is the 
closest thing to class on Korbin. The 900 square 
kilometer plantation is a forest of green trees, all 
of them bearing the oval-shaped, metallic golden 
kyrf fruit — the fruit thrives in dry or arid condi- 
tions. The plantation is surrounded by a power 
fence, and the perimeter is heavily guarded by 
mercenaries who are unflinchingly loyal to Bin. 
Many of the laborers on the farm are people who 
owe Bin money and must work to pay off their 
debt. The plantation a!so has a small processing 
plant, which turns out the kyrf liquor. 

Cross-Galactic Mining Corporation handles the 
exportation of the liquor. Bin doesn't trust the 
corporation, but it seems to be the only organiza- 
tion on the planet sufficiently competent to handle 
the shipping of the product and business trans- 
actions with the purchasers. 

Bin lives in a spacious, beautiful home, air- 
conditioned and filled with every luxury imagin- 
able, including several Droids anda few mistresses. 


62 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


PAR 
ARS 


Mike Vilardi 


pepr eee eee 


-WA 


Dreimar Bin, Corrupt 
Plantation Owner 

Species: Human 

Height: 1.5 meters 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Dodge 5D, hold-out blaster 4D, melee 

parry 3D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 3D+2 

Streetwise 8D, technology 7D 

MECHANICAL 2D+1 

Repulsorlift ops 4D, starship piloting 3D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 7D, command 6D, con 8D, search 

5D+1 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 3D+2 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Security 4D 

Description: Bin is a pencil-thin, hawk-nosed 
man witha pinched smile, sharp chin, and slicked- 
back hair. He dresses in the finest clothing, and 
keeps his hold-out blaster hidden. 

Objectives: To accumulate massive wealth, 
and take over Cross-Galactic Mining someday. 
To become the most prominent power on Korbin, 


Sex: Male 


while staying safe from harm. 

Background: Bin was a corporate employee 
on a large industrial planet, until it was discov- 
ered that he was embezzling funds. He fled before 
anyone could capture him and wound up seeking 
refuge on Korbin. Once there, he met a man who 
had perfected a means of distilling kyrf fruit into 
a potent liquor. Bin killed the man and took over 
his plantation. 

Personality: Bin is a conniving, scheming any- 
thing-for-a-credit crimelord. He has no scruples, 
though he sees himself as a man of taste. Bin 
always enjoys negotiating from a position of 
strength. 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (damage 3D), 
comlink, gaudy jewelry, rich clothing. 

Quote: “You call me a swindler ... I prefer to 
consider myself a ‘creative financier.’ It sounds 
SO much nicer!” 


Average Mercenary 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 5D, brawling parry 4D, melee 6D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+2 
Alien Races 4D+1, streetwise 5D 
MECHANICAL 1D 


KORBIN DIAGRAM 
Kyrf Plantation 


Mansion 


Guard Towers 


Plantation Area: 900 sq. km 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Cathleen Hunter 


PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 4D, con 5D, hide/sneak 4D+1, 

search 5D 

STRENGTH 3D+1 

Brawling 5D+1 

TECHNICAL 1D 

security 4D 

Equipment: Bounty hunter armor (1D), heavy 
blaster pistol (damage 5D), vibroblade 
(Str+1D+2), comlink, two grenades (damage 5D), 
macrobinoculars. 

Quote: “Great pay, great hours, free kyrf li- 
quor, and the opportunity to shoot lots of people. 
It’s a dream job!” 


Scrub Lizards 


The predominant native life form on Korbin 
is the scrub lizard. These large carnivorous rep- 
tiles enjoy congregating in the Last Call valley, as 
well as near the roadways that link the cities. 
Scale coloration ranges from copper to golden 
brown. Scrub lizards can crawl flush with the 
ground, which leads some to mistake them for 
snakes. 

Korbinites enjoy hunting the big lizards for 
food and sport. The skin and teeth of a scrub 
lizard make colorful personal adornments. Some 


Korbin Scrub Lizard O 


Rob Caswell 


ee 


ARS 


of the nastier local gangs take their enemies and 
“lizardbait” them, which involves tying the unfor- 
tunate to stakes pounded into the ground and 
letting the lizards take him. 

Scrub lizards are attracted to kyrf, but are 
incapable of becoming intoxicated by drinking it. 
Drelmar Bin has a large force of mercenaries 
employed to keep the lizards away. Denying the 
only decent fruit to the scrub lizards does not do 
much for their temperament, which might ex- 
plain their aggressive and violent behavior to- 
ward humans. 

Efforts to domesticate the scrub lizards have 
met with mixed success, with a few of the species 
made into mounts, beasts of burden or watch- 
lizards. 


Scrub Lizards 

DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Hide/Sneak 5D, tracking 5D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Orneriness: 5D 

Speed Code: 3D 

Size: 3 meters long, 1 meter high at shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Armor: +1D to Strength 

Attacks: 

Teeth:: 5D damage 
Trample: 4D damage 

Combat: A scrub lizard enjoys grabbing an 
opponent in its jaws and shaking him around. If 
the lizard’s attack roll exceed the difficulty by 10 
or more, the lizard has the opponentin its mouth. 

In subsequent rounds, the lizard continues to 
shake its prey around, automatically causing 3D 
of damage. In order to get free of the lizard, the 
victim must make a Difficult Strength roll. 2 

Another favorite tactic of the lizards is to 
trample opponents. The scrub lizard can attack 
two opponents at once in this manner. 

Using Scrub Lizardsin The Roleplaying Game: 
These lizards are ill-tempered and always hun- 
gry. They live off of the scrub plants and insects 
found on the planet, but the lizards really prefer 
meat, such as the Korbinites. If a victim is 
wounded by a lizard, the scent of blood drives 
the creature into a frenzy, which enables it to 
move at twice its normal speed and it gains an 
extra 1D for Strength and Dexterity actions. 

Scrub lizards often travel in groups of 1D+1. 


The Salvaging Crews 


There exists a core of people on Korbin who 
do salvaging for a living. 

The total time of most salvage runs, including 
round trip travel time, is four days. The salvage is 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


The Night Havok 
Craft: The Night Havok 
Captain: Kara Saffch 
Type: Corellian Stock Light Freighter, 
Modified 
Length: 30 meters 
Scale: Starfighter 
Crew: 2 
Passengers: 5 
Cargo Capacity: 200 metric tons 
Consumables: 1 month 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Hyperdrive Backup: Yes 


Sublight Speed: 3D 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Hull: 5D 


Weapons: 
Dual Laser Cannons (fire linked) 
Fire Control: 4D 
Damage: 6D 
Single Laser Cannon 
Fire Control: 3D 
Damage: 3D 
Shields: 2D 
Description: The ship carries an Astromech 
Droid, Artoo Zeefor. The ship is stocked 
with salvage equipment suchas spacesuits, 
metal detectors, cutting torches, etc. 


either directly used as is, or sold or traded on the 
Korbin. 

The only law of salvage is “finders keepers, 
providing the keepers can hold on to it.” There 
are some pirates, nicknamed “carrion eaters.” 
who lurk in the spaceways between Korbin and 
her sister worlds, waiting for asuccessful salvage 
ship to come by. These pirates want others to 
take the risks, so that they may take the loot. 

Of course, not all salvagers are rotten to the 
core. A few, like Kara Saffch and her technician 
brother, Willi, are willing to take on risky jobs for 
relatively little money, providing they have some 
regard for the cause being fought for. Often, 
these residents of Korbin can be found well out- 
side the system, pursuing their trade. 


Kara Saffch, Salvage Expert and 
Captain of the Night Havok 
Species: Human 
Height: 1.7 meters 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 6D+1, dodge 6D, melee parry 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 


Sex: Female 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Salvage 9D, streetwise 7D, technology 7D 

MECHANICAL 4D 

Astrogation 5D, repulsorlift ops 6D, 

starship gunnery 6D, starship piloting 7D, 

starship shields 5D+2 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 6D+2, command 5D, con 6D, 

gambling 5D+2, search 8D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 5D, lifting 4D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Starship repair 6D+2 

Description: Karais a Human female with brown 
hair that barely reaches to the back of her neck. She 
is usually dressed in a flight suit and comfortable 
jacket . Karahas a cocky grin that many people find 
charming, and more find irritating. 

Objectives: To keep her ship intact and even- 
tually put together enough money to relocate 
from the Korbin system once and for all. 

Background: When she was 17 years old, Kara 
and her younger brother, Willi, ran away from 
home in order to explore the galaxy and have 
some fun. Ten years later, after many interesting 
incidents, she and her brother found themselves 
the owners of their own ship, and a great deal of 
debt along with it. Both realized that the Korbin 
system was a pit, but that the cost of living there 
was amazingly cheap. 

Not willing to become pirates, they decided to 
do salvage work and the occasional passenger 
run to pay the bills. 

Personality: Kara is upbeat, proud, and full of 
enthusiasm for her work. She tries to put on an 
“everything is under control” act whenever things 
break down. Sometimes, she is even convincing. 

Equipment: Blaster (damage 4D), comlink, 
space suit. 

Quote: “No, no, that was NOT our hyperdrive 
coils ... That was just the ship settling after that 
exhausting jump ... yeah, that’s it.” 


Necresh 

DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 1D 

Size: 20 centimeters from head to tail 

Speed Code: 4D 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Teeth: 2D damage 

Combat: Necresh attack en masse and are use 
their teeth to inflict damage. While they can be 
dangerous when disturbed, there are no known 
instances of their attacking a living person. But 
visitors to Last Call would be wise to be wary of 


these little creatures. 

Using Necresh in the Roleplaying Game: 
Necresh are rodent-like mammals, carrion-eat- 
ers who thrive in Last Call. It’s unknown just how 
many thousands may be living in the valley. Little 
attention is paid to pest-control on Korbin, and 
the violent nature of the planet keeps the crea- 
tures well fed and away from the cities. 

Necresh are covered in short, wiry red hair 
and can scurry exceedingly rapidly on their four 
legs. Their senses of smell and hearing are acute, 
but they are completely mute. One Korbin wit 
once said that necresh are silent “out of respect 
for the dead.” 

Those low-level criminals charged with deliv- 
ering bodies to Last Call regard the necresh with 
loathing and a trace of fear. For their part, the 
rodents generally flee when they hear anyone 
approaching, emerging again after their visitors 
are gone. 


Draz 

DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Size: 1.5 meters from head to tail 

Speed Code: 2D 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Teeth: 4D damage 
Claws: 3D damage 

Combat: Draz use their claws and teeth to 
good effect in combat, and most are trained to go 
for the throat or, if the foe is armed, the gun hand. 
The tactics of wild draz are completely unpre- 
dictable, and if encountered, these creatures are 
best left alone. 

Using Drazin the Roleplaying Game: Draz are 
extremely vicious canines, the product of some 
long-forgotten effort to breed animals purely for 
purposes of combat. The experiment was both a 
success and a failure: the draz are certainly effi- 
cient killers, but so much so that no one off- 
planet wanted anything to do with them. Most of 
the creatures can at best be called crazed. 

Draz are used as guard animals and for protec- 
tion by various gangs on Korbin. The sight of a 
growling draz or two, steel-gray hair standing up 
in anticipation of the kill, is sufficient to frighten 
away all but the most determined foes. 

Draz can be found in every major city on 
Korbin. Some are taken into training schools and 
sold, others must fend for themselves in the 
streets and alleyways. These are the most dan- 
gerous, as hunger and desperation often drives 
them to attacking humans. 


Korbin ——— SSS... = 


Adventure Idea 


Acriminal organization based in Pleasant City 
has begun shaking down the citizens of Happy for 
protection money. Most of Happy’s residents 
are, of course, criminals as well — but those few 
who are (relatively) innocent are also being vic- 
timized. A collection of Happy residents ask the 
characters to protect them, promising in return 
access to a cache of weapons originally intended 
for shipment to Imperials. 

The characters are outnumbered and 
outgunned. They will have to rely on their wits 
and make good use of the terrain in and around 
Happy to defend the city from its larger neighbor. 


Adventure Idea 


The NIght Havok has been hired to transport 
an important cargo of black market medical sup- 
plies to a New Republic base in a nearby system. 
But Captain Saffch well knows that pirates will be 
waiting to seize the medicines and equipment if 
possible, and so hires the characters to “ride 
shotgun” on the shipment. They will accompany 
her, brother Willi, a New Republic official, and a 
trio of mercenary “security guards” on the run. 

During the course of the trip, the Night Havok 
will have to outrun pirates and avoid some more 
aggressive salvage crews. In addition, the char- 
acters will find evidence that all is not as it seems 
on the ship. All signs point to the mercenaries 
having betrayed the ship to Imperials. But in fact, 
the New Republic official is an impostor who has 
subsituted poison for the medicine being trans- 
ported. The characters must uncover the decep- 
tion before the Night Havok reaches the base or 
else watch tragedy befall their comrades. 


Adventure Idea 


Ores mined in the asteroid belt are somehow 
being smuggled out of the system and sold to 
raise money for fragments of the Imperial army. 
The New Republic asks the characters to go 
undercover as miners for the Daedalus Corpora- 
tion to discover the truth of the matter. 

The characters swiftly discover that nothing 
is how it appears to be at Daedalus. Miners are 
treated like convicts, many being worked until 
they drop dead. Disk work is being falsified and 
corporate officials are seen wearing full protec- 
tive suits when handling ores. Some of the labor- 
ers are afflicted with strange illnesses. The exist- 
ence of entire digs are being covered up at the 
highest levels of Daedalus. 

The truth is horrendous: using slave labor 
purchased on Korbin, Daedalus has its miners 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


DE 


-WA 


illegally digging for radioactive ores, to be sold to 
Imperial engineers for use in weaponry. Lacking 
the proper protection, the miners are being poi- 
soned by the very ore they’re handling. 

The characters must find a way to stop the 
mining operation and expose Daedalus as an 
Imperial front before they, too, perish. 


Adventure Idea 


A Corellian Corvette, the Empire’s Twilight, 
has been lost. The last signals came from the 
vicinity of the Korbin system. The Republic hires 
the characters to search for the vessel and any 
survivors. 

The Empire’s Twilight was attacked by pirates 
while passing through the Korbin system, in the 
vicinity of Abatrang. Captured by the gravity of 
that planet, the ship went out of control — fortu- 
nately, the 45 crewmembers had the presence of 
mind to eject in an escape module. They are 
currently living inside this structure on the 
planet’s surface, with enough food, water and air 
to last for one week. 

Salvage crews will inevitably spot the module. 


The characters will have to brave the perils of 
Abatrang to save the crew, and even then their 
mission will not be finished — “carrion eaters” are 
waiting in space near the world and may mistake 
the characters for successful scavengers. 


Adventure Idea 


While on Korbin, the characters are ap- 
proached by Drelmar Bin’s men and told that he 
has a business proposition for them. At his plan- 
tation, Bin tells the characters that he wants 
them to capturetwoscrub lizards, since he wishes 
to have them trained as attack animals. 

Being a generous man, he will pay each char- 
acter 2500 credits for each lizard captured. He 
does not have cages and nets, so the characters 
are going to have to make do with what they have, 
or can purchase in Pleasant City. He mentions 
that the best place to look is “Last Call.” 

In the valley, the characters will find scrub 
lizards, all right. They will also find gang mem- 
bers disposing of the bodies of some of their 
rivals, who will be disposed to attack the charac- 
ters “so they can’t tell anyone what they saw.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


67 


System Summary 


The Zelosian system has a white star and three 
planets. Keryt, the first planet in the system, is a 
barren rock that could be terraformed if the 
effort were ever to be put into it. 

Zelos is the second planet in the system. Its 
four moons have never been explored, as the 
Zelosians have forbidden others to explore them 
due to overwhelming ancient superstitions. 

Rymm is the third planet, and is a consider- 
able distance from Zelos. The planet is geologi- 
cally unstable and still going through tectonic 
shifts, characterized by frequent earthquakes 
and volcanic eruptions. 

The gravity well is close to Rymm, and thereis 
some speculation that Rymm’s instability can be 
attributed to the well. Ships that file a naviga- 
tional flight plan with the Empire are given the 
proper approach vectors. 


The Gravity Well 


This anomalyis astationary distortion in space, 
located close to the orbit of Rymm, the third 
planet in the Zelos system. The Empire has it 
well-charted and is aware of a means to avoid it. 

When a ship piloted by someone who is not 
aware of the anomaly’s presence passes the sys- 
tem (orenters it), thereis astrong likelihood that 
the gravity well will capture the vessel and hurl 
it close to the orbit of Zelos II. 

The anomaly’s effects are handled as follows: 

e The unsuspecting ship arrives within range 
of the gravity well. Hyperdrive immediately cuts 
out due to the presence of massive gravitational 
forces. 


System Datafile 


Zelos system, star: Zelos, white star. Three planets in 
system, second planet, Zelos Il, terrestrial. Good port 
facilities. 

Be warned that there are many nocturnal predators on 


Zelos Il, a source of fear among the populace. Be advised 
that the population is extremely superstitious. 

Loyal citizens of the Empire, be advised that the only 
safe approach vector to Zelos II is X coordinate 7.5, Y 
coordinate 4.2, Z coordinate 0.9. Any other course will 
result in disruption due to presence of a gravity well. 


e Ship’s pilot must make a Moderate starship 
piloting roll. Success indicates the ship is stabi- 
lized, and may resume its journey, even if the 
destination is not the Zelos system. 

e If the ship’s pilot failed his roll, the vessel is 
caught in the gravity well and begins hurtling 
uncontrollably into the system. Ship’s pilot must 
make another starship piloting roll, this one Diffi- 
cult. Success means the ship is stabilized, and 
slows down as it arrives in Zelos II's orbit. 

e Failing the roll means that the ship was badly 
shaken during its passage through the system. 
Roll twice on the “Starship System Damage Table” 
contained in Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game. 

Note that hurtling through the system, regard- 
less of whether or not the second starship pilot 
roll was made successfully, produces a very 
bumpy ride, with lots of shaking and rattling. 
This little trip should produce a lot of dramatic 
tension as everything inside the ship begins shak- 
ing and things are turned upside down, falling off 
of shelves, and people are tumbling out of bunks, 
falling out of chairs, etc. 


The Zelosian Moons 


Zelos Il has four moons, named, from largest to 
smallest: Bellatrig, Tanatrig, Moratrig, and 
Nekotrig. 

If all four moons ever appear in the night sky 
together, with at least one moon full, this is enough 
to send the populace into a deep depression and 
intensify their fears, even in the daytime. This 
phenomenon happens once every 120 days. 

The worst experience possible for the 
Zelosians is a solar eclipse which, when the 
entire sky is darkened, reveals the presence of 
the other three moons in the sky. Such an event 
is called the “Day of Sepulchral Night,” and 
prompts mass closings of stores and bars, lock- 
ing of all doors, and in some instances, tempo- 
rary insanity or suicide attempts, prompted by 
abject terror. (In truth, the sky on a Day of 
Sepulchral Night does look foreboding. When the 
eclipsing moon moves into position, it almost 
seems as if the other moons appear by magic.) 


The Zelosians 


The natives of Zelos II appear to be of Human 
stock, but with some subtle differences. Their 
height, build, hair color variation, and ability to 


68 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


n OD Oe 


PLANET 


Zelos Il Mountainous 


Starport: Standard 
Population: 10 million 


Government: Dictatorship 
Tech Level: Information 


Major Exports: Raw ores 
Major Imports: Weaponry, food 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Zelos 


Star Name: Zelos Star Type: White 


ORBITAL BODIES 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Hemisphere 


World Summary 


Zelos Il is located near an important regional 
Imperial trade route. It is considered a pleasant place 
to stop by to do some trading, perhaps get some 
routine maintenance done on one’s ship, perhaps 
even enjoy a little bit of relaxation. 

The planet is known for its mining industry, and is 
a prime source of ores for the Empire, though the 
Zelosians are not aware to whom their government 
sells the minerals. The Zelosians believe themselves 
to be neutral in the galactic struggle. 

The planet is covered by hills, mountains, and 
other rough terrain. There are only a few scattered 
islands in the Zelosian oceans. Kryndyn, the capital, 
is located on the primary continent. 

Zelos Il boasts four moons, upon which many 
local superstitions center. An inexplicable gravity 
well also rests at the edge of the system, which is 
responsible for untold numbers of unexpected visi- 
tors to the planet every year. 

Zelos Il is Imperial-aligned. 


69 


Cathleen Hunter 


grow facial hair is similar to other typical Human 
races. All Zelosians are night-blind, their eyes 
unable to see in less light than that provided by 
a full moon. In addition, all Zelosian eyes are 
emerald green. 

The greatest difference between Zelosians and 
standard Human stock is that Zelosians are de- 
scended from intelligent plant life. Their veins do 
not have blood, but a form of chlorophyll sap. 
There is no good way to visually tell a Zelosian 
from aregular Human, since their skin pigmenta- 
tion resembles the normal shades found in Hu- 
manity. This plant heritage is something the 
Zelosians keep secret. 

The Zelosians’ plant heritage does go a long 
way toward explaining their dislike of darkness, 
and their transformation into happy, carefree 
people in the sunlight. Their skin photosynthe- 
sizes for them, though they are also able to take 
nourishment from other sources, including other 
plants, as well as animal meat. 

Since the vast majority of alcoholic beverages 
come from plants, Zelosians love to drink, though 
due to their physiology, they cannot become 
intoxicated. Refined sugar, on the other hand, is 
something else. A tablespoon of sugar to a 
Zelosian is the equivalent of four ounces of strong 
liquor to a Human. 

The entire culture of the Zelosians is built 
upon the dichotomy of day and night. In their 
language, “good” is synonymous with bright, 
light, glowing, and day. “Bad” is identified with 
dimness, darkness, shadows, and night. Speak- 
ing any of the four latter words is akin to swearing 
in the Zelosian society. 

There are dark-skinned Zelosians, but they are 
not shunned. It appears that the light-darkness 
stigma is limited to their words and ideas, and 
excludes colors, as they paint their dwellings all 
manner of hues and will wear any shade of cloth- 
ing, including black. 

During daylight hours, Zelosians are happy, 
cheerful, energetic, helpful, kind, open, pleasant 
people with laughing voices and animated move- 
ments. As the sun goes down, their moods sink, 
and they seek the shelter of their well-locked 
homes, even to the point of being rude and 
leaving someone in the middle of a task or con- 
versation in order to get home in time. During the 
night, Zelosians are fearful, easily cowed, suspi- 
cious, and unwilling to help strangers. 

Whatever the time of day, the Zelosians are 
very superstitious people. The following aresome 
of their more interesting superstitions: 

e Never leap out of a starship and land on the 
ground with both feet. 

¢ Never travel in groups of four. Four is an 


unlucky number. 

e If the light of two full moons strikes you, you 
will die within one day. 

e If someone spills water or any other drink, 
they must be lightly slapped across the face 

e Right is an unlucky direction. Shake with 
your left hand. Right-handed people are more 
vulnerable to bad luck. 

e Never begin a voyage, including a space 
voyage, at night. 

e Never make plans at night. 

$ Devout vegetarians are bad luck. 


Government 


Galleros Nul is the charismatic military leader 
of the planet. Though in simple terms he is a 
dictator, he dislikes the word, and instead pre- 
fers to call himself the “Mandated Commander of 
the People of Zelos.” People may address him as 
“Commander.” 

Nul’s most amazing talent is his ability to 
withstand being outside at night without break- 
ing into a panic. This discipline came slowly and 
with much training, but it has paid off by vastly 
increasing his stature among the people. His 
evening constitutionals are the only time he trav- 
els without his six bodyguards, who have yet to 
overcome their dislike of the darkness (they are 
always within shouting distance, however). 

The word of Commander Nul is absolute law. 
The people obey his orders without question. 
This blind obedience stems from Nul's record of 
public service. He enlisted in the Zelosian Home 
Defense Force as a young man and worked his 
way rapidly through the ranks, eventually being 
named a general. 

Soon after that, a particularly devastating 
attack on the capital city of Kryndyn by a horde 
of nocturnal predators resulted in the slaying of 
the planet’s leadership, General Nul declared a 
temporary state of emergency. He rallied the 
armies under his command, launched a counter- 
attack, and drove back the hordes of night. 

This incident, known as the “Battle of Kryndyn,” 
was fought 10 years ago. Nul has yet to lift the state 
of emergency and has no intention of doing so. 

As for the Empire and the New Republic, Com- 
mander Nul has declared Zelos II to be neutral. 
This is a hollow gesture, since the Empire con- 
trols all approaches to the Zelos system, and has 
in fact established a full sized TIE fighter base in 
the Valley of Umbra. This is the ideal site for such 
a base, as no Zelosian, not even Null dares set 
foot here (see below). 

Thus, Nul’s absolute rule exists because the 
Imperials allow it to, largely because it saves 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


eee Zelos Il 
NN SSS 


"WA 


them the trouble of keeping the skittish popula- 
tion in line. Besides, there are some in the Impe- 
rial ranks who admire Nul’s use of power plays 
and underhanded tactics. 


Commander Galleros Nul 
Dictator-For-Life 

Species: Zelosian 

Height: 1.7 meters 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 4D, blaster rifle 5D, dodge 7D, 

melee parry 5D+1, melee 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Bureaucracy 7D, survival 6D, technology 

5D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift ops 3D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 7D, command 9D, con 6D+2 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 5D, stamina 5D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Security 4D+1 

Physical Description: Commander Nul is a 
handsome, fortyish man, with jet-black hair and 
piercing green eyes. He generally wears his mili- 
tary uniform, covered with his medals. 

Objectives: To stay in power for his entire life, 
while somehow grooming a worthy successor. 


Sex: Male 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Background: Galleros Nul was raised to fear 
the dark, but his curiosity prompted him to make 
late-night forays to see what was out there. In 
time, he became virtually immune to the terrors 
the evening brings on Zelos II, although there are 
still places, like the Valley of Umbra, to which he 
will not go. The rest of Nul’s background is cov- 
ered above. 

Personality: Nul is a tactical and strategic 
genius. However, he is all too well aware of this, 
and has an inflated ego as a result. His sense of 
arrogance and self-importance is truly amazing. 
He feels that, when he gives an order, it should be 
obeyed without question. 

Nul possesses a strong streak of curiosity, 
which has served him well. He enjoys meeting 
new people, and, if word gets to him about inter- 
esting travellers who have landed on the planet, 
he will invite them to dinner and talk about 
science and the stars. 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), vibroblade 
(damage STR+1D+2), comlink, swagger stick 

Quote: “I am just a humble soldier who was in 
the right place at the right time. I shall step down 
when the state of emergency is lifted. When is 
that? Ah. Well, with all of the hordes of nocturnal 
predators that we must deal with, to cancel the 
state of emergency now would be suicide. Once 
lam convinced that my beloved kingdom is safe, 
I shall step down.” 


Population Centers 


There is only one political unit on Zelos Il, 
based in the capital city of Kryndyn. No other 
nations exist. In fact, the entire population lives 
onasingle continent, Galleros (renamed in honor 
of the Commander). The capital city of Kryndyn 
holds nine million people, while the remaining 
five smaller cities hold the other million. The 
largest of these is the coast city of Nul (also 
named in honor of the Commander). 

All Zelosian cities have certain things in com- 
mon. Each city features a 10 meter-high wall 
around it, with six gates. The wall is wide enough 
that sentries may walk on top of it while on 
patrol. Each small city has a garrison of 1000 
troops. Kryndyn has a garrison of 50,000 troops. 

The five small cities have several mines close 
by, usually within a few kilometers of each city. 
The cities are connected by a roadway and a 
railway system. The two lines run parallel to each 
other. The railways are the only way for the ore 
to be transported to Kryndyn, from where it is 
then shipped off-planet on ore freighters. Nul 
also has an airfield that allows airshuttle land- 
ings, and a port that accommodates ships from 
the capital. 


Kryndyn 
Kryndypn is the heart and soul of Zelos II. Here, 
a traveller can find a wide selection of bars, 


ARS” 


Mike Vilardi 


casinos, entertainment centers, libraries, sports 
events, and hotels. 

The natives of Kryndyn are very friendly to off- 
worlders, especially those that bring shipments 
of weapons or edible delicacies to sell. Thereisa 
thriving commodities market, where traders 
come to purchase loads of Zelosian ore. The 
market is dominated by the Empire, though this 
is not common knowledge. 

Commander Nul resides in the old Royal Pal- 
ace, from which he runs the affairs of the planet. 
The Palace always has at least 100 soldiers garri- 
soned within it at any given time. 


The Valley of Umbra 


This unique geological formation has a valley 
500 meters deep, protected by many mountain- 
ous overhangs. Despite appearances, there is 
ample room in the valley for fighter pilots and 
airspeeder or landspeeder drivers to operate 
their vehicles 

The Valley of Umbra is always in the shadows. 
Sunlight never strikes it, and consequently it is 
shunned by all Zelosians. The Empire has taken 
full advantage of native superstition by creating 
a fully equipped, fully operational base and Impe- 
rial garrison. The base follows the same design 
and sports the same defenses as the Imperial 
Garrison detailed on pages 116-120 of the Star 
Wars Sourcebook. The only exception is that this 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


oF cs COS || 


base is occupied by a half-strength garrison, TheImperial Garrison is commanded by Luana 
which includes the following: Treftite, an ambitious young lady who aspires to 
Stormtroopers 400 greater things than the command of an installa- 
Scout Troopers 20 tion on a backwater planet populated by super- 
Speeder Bike Technicians 10 stitious sheep. 
TIE Fighter Pilots 20 Though the Zelosians are, of course, aware of 
Ground Crew Technicians 30 the continued existence of the Empire, they have 
Controllers 12 no idea that there are Imperial forces on the 
Sensor Technicians 12 planet. Even Nul is unaware of the existence of 
Gunners/Wpns Technicians 50 the base, firm in his belief that the Empire heeded 
Walker Crew Personnel 25 his wishes that Zelos II be left alone. 
Walker Technicians 40 Treftite will concede that the Zelosians are 
Imperial Intelligence 25 correct about the potential dangers from noctur- 
Base Security/Detention 75 nal predators on the planet. The bold, fearsome 
Perimeter Support Troops 100 and plentiful creatures have accounted for a 
Command Personnel 150 number of losses among her base’s perimeter 
Support/Services Person. 250 guards. 
Technical Personnel 100 > s 
Science Personnel 100 Major Luana Treftite 
Medical Personnel 50 Imperial Garrison Commander 
> Species: Human 
AA 20 Height: 1.6 meters Sex: Female 
- alkers 5 
AT-ST Walkers 5 DEELEY 39 
Speeder Bikes 20 Blaster 5D, dodge 5D, melee 5D 
Landspeeders 30 KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Misc. Vehicles 50 Survival 6D+1, technology 5D 
MECHANICAL 4D 


ZELOS lI DIAGRAM 
The Valley of Umbra 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 73 


Cathleen Hunter 


Astrogation 5D+1, repulsorlift ops 6D, 
starship gunnery 7D, starship piloting 8D, 
starship shields 5D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 6D, command 8D, con 6D, search 

7D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 4D, stamina 3D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 4D, 

security 5D, starship repair 3D+1 

Description: Luana is a coldly beautiful, severe- 
looking woman with very pale skin, pale blonde 
hair in a tight bun, and icy blue eyes. She is always 
in her uniform, including her officer's cap. 

Objectives: To rise above this assignment, and 
be reassigned to better duty, hopefully either inthe 
heart of the Empire, or in command of an important 
military base. 

Background: Luana grew up on tales of the Jedi 
Knights. Her parents were loyal to the Old Repub- 
lic. As a teenager, she attempted to learn the ways 
of the Force. However, she failed in her training, 
mostly because she desired the power solely in 
order to gain glory and inflict injury on her en- 
emies. Embittered, she embraced the Empire, 
turned her parents in, and has risen in the ranks of 
the Imperial forces. 

Personality: Like her appearance, Luana is se- 
vere. She is a no-nonsense military officer and 
underneath her harsh exterior and business-like 
demeanor, there beats a heart of cold stone. 

Often Luana flies her own TIE Interceptor. 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), comlink 

Quote: “This may bea garrison ona backwater 
planet, but it’s my garrison, and it shall be run as 
if it were the late Emperor's own personal guard! 
Any who disagree are free to protest by doing an 
extra shift of perimeter patrol ... armed only with 
a dagger.” 


Creatures of Zelos 


Zelos Il is home to a number of dangerous 
creatures, the vast majority of whom are noctur- 
nal, including the three listed below. 


Aga 

Aga have leathery grey skin, yellow eyes, fangs, 
and six muscular legs. They can walk on their 
four hind legs, using the forelegs as arms. Aga 
have the potential to become an advanced spe- 
cies, as shown by their tendency to use tools 
such as clubs. 

Aga generally travel in groups of 1D+1. 


ee ee 


ARS 


Aga 

DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 5D 

Hide/sneak 7D 

STRENGTH 7D 

Ormeriness: 5D 

Speed Code: 3D 

Size: 4 meters tall 

Armor: Str+1D 

Attacks: 

Bite: 4D 
Claws: 3D 
Clubs: Str+1D 

Combat: Aga attack other creatures for the 
sheer enjoyment of the fight as well as for food. 
Normally, they will use their clubs to batter their 
opponents to death. 

Using Aga in The Roleplaying Game: Aga are 
pack creatures, who stalk their prey until a good 
opportunity to attack shows itself. Aga begin 
their attacks with a terrifying screech (it is rec- 
ommended that the gamemaster let loose with a 
completely unexpected screech before spring- 
ing the encounter on the players). All opponents 
who hear the screech must make a Moderate 
Perception roll, or be so shaken that they suffer a 
minus 1D penalty to all actions against the Aga. 

Kilit 

The Kilitis a raptor covered in oily, black short 
hair. It clearly resembles an avian, complete with 
beak, beady eyes, wings, and claws. Kilits travel 
in flights of 2D. 

A little-known legend says that the Kilit got its 
name when two ancestors of the Zelosians were 
wandering in the wilderness. The pair ran afoul of 
one of the avians, which attacked the senior 
scout. The amazed junior scout, who had been 
taught all he knew by his companion, exclaimed 
“What is it?,” to which the senior scout, in pain, 
replied “Kill it!” The name stuck. 

Kilit 

DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Orneriness: 4D 

Speed Code: 6D (flight) 

Size: 1 meter long, 2-meter wingspan 

Attacks: 

Beak: 4D 

Combat: Kilits are avian creatures with razor 
sharp beaks. They attack by swooping down on 
unsuspecting prey, latching on with their beaks, 
and draining as much fluid as they can. Once 
attached, the kilit will attempt to continue to 
drain fluids until the victim dies. The kilit auto- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


md TAA 
-WA 


a 


q 


matically causes 2D damage to the victim every 
round after the initial attack. 

Removing the kilit requires a Moderate (modi- 
fied by the Kilit’s Strength) Strength roll. Ifthe victim 
is light enough, a Kilit will attempt to carry it off. 

Using Kilits in The Roleplaying Game: Kilits 
have a knack for finding moisture, particularly in 
the form of living beings. They possess a certain 
amount of craftiness. 


Kro 


Kro are rodent-like reptiles with wide, scoop- 
like snouts, and a toothy maw. Their tails are 
prehensile, and they use them to hang from tree 
branches, or get a better grip on an opponent. 

The most frightening aspect of the Kro is their 
red eyes, which glow in the dark. The Kro have 
two legs and bristly brown hair. 

Kro travel in packs of 4D. They will never 
attack a group of beings that they do not outnum- 
ber by more than two to one. 

Although the Kro savor flesh, they usually make 
do with roots and scrub plants. They make a 
distinctive “meep” sound when they are attacking. 


Kro 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Speed Code: 5D 
Size: 1 meters long 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


in A Aga 


7a 


Ni 


Attacks: 
Bite: 3D 

Combat: The Kro attack with a bite. Their 
favorite tactic is to swarm over their opponents 
and overwhelm them. 

Using Kro in The Roleplaying Game: Kro are 
cowardly if encountered alone. It is from the pack 
that they get their strength and courage. 


The Walking Dead 


Zelos is home to a unique species of nocturnal 
parasite called “Jumpers.” This three millimeter- 
long creature feasts solely on the dead. However, 
its feeding produces a rather grisly side-effect. If 
the body has been dead for a week or less, it is 
vulnerable to certain enzymes and electrical cur- 
rents released by the Jumper during its feasting. 
This combination of enzyme and electrical en- 
ergy “jumps” the brain back into activity. Motor 
skills are engaged, and the dead get up and walk. 
Residual memory causes the animated dead to 
go to the last site visited prior to its death and 
just stand there, which produces some unpleas- 
ant reactions among the living. 

The effect lasts for 1D hours, after which the 
Jumper leaves the body, having taken everything 
it can from that particular corpse. The emptied 
body then collapses again. 

It must be stressed that the so-called revived 
dead are automatons. There is no conscious- 


Rob Caswell 


ness. All functions are reflexive, triggered by the 
parasite. If the body is attacked by weapons, and 
given four more wound levels, it collapses and 
will not move again. 

Note that it is the Imperial garrison that has 
discovered these parasites, not the Zelosians. The 
Zelosians are convinced that the dead truly walk 
again. Imperial Commander Luana Treftite is de- 
lighted that this phenomenon elicits such a reac- 
tion; she wants to keep the population terrified. 


Adventure Idea 


A mysterious figure has begun stalking the 
capital city of Kryndyn, setting fire to buildings, 
robbing shops and generally terrorizing the popu- 
lace. The culprit is an Imperial guard whose mind 
was broken by too many nights on sentry duty, 
fending off Zelos’ nocturnal predators. Though 
Major Treftite is aware of the situation, she is 
unwilling to take steps to stop his rampage, for 
fear of exposing the presence of an Imperial base 
on the planet. 

At the same time, the Zelosians are unable to 
stop him because of their fear of the dark. The 
only possibility of stopping the madman lies with 
the characters, who must brave the terrors of the 
Zelosian night to bring him down. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters learn that a top Imperial official 
will be passing through the Zelos system, on his 
way to a secret meeting with some of the galaxy’s 
top assassins. It is believed he will be handing out 
a contract on a major New Republic figure — but 
who, and where the meeting will be held, remain 
mysteries, 

The official's ship will be protected by a num- 
ber of Imperial fighters, and Commander Nul has 
given his “permission” for them to pass through 
the system. The New Republic asks the charac- 
ters to stop this convoy and learn the target of 
the murder plot. 

Thecharacters are provided with ships, though 
nowhere near enough to stop the Imperials. How- 
ever, if the Imperials could be lured into the 
clutches of the gravity well and forced down on 
Zelos or one of its neighboring planets, the char- 
acters might have a far better chance of success. 

Once they capture the Imperial agent, they will 
learn that the target of the assassination is none 
other than Mon Mothma herself. The agent taunts 
them that if he does not arrive to meet with the 
assassins, they have orders to send message back 
through Imperial spies and await further instruc- 
tions. Eventually, he says, the Empire will send 
someone else to pay them their blood money, 


The characters have only one chance: if one of 
them could impersonate the Imperial agent, they 
could lead the assassins into a trap and save the 
life of Mon Mothma. But exposure would mean 
instant death, so the chosen character had best 
be sure his act is perfect. 


Adventure Idea 


A group of Imperial agents have been directed 
to ensure that Commander Nul “keeps in his 
place” and does not get the idea into his head to 
challenge Imperial authority directly. Rather than 
actually threatening him, the agents have de- 
cided to use the common superstitions of the 
Zelosians against him — rigging it so that he 
travels in groups of four, is (apparently) struck 
by the light of two full moons, etc. 

Frightened (though unwilling to admit it), Nul 
retains the services of the characters to protect 
him from what appears to bea conspiracy by the 
Fates to destroy him. 

With the characters involved, the agents up 
theante. After all, they are prohibited from killing 
Nul, but not a bunch of New Republic upstarts. 
Again using the superstitions of the Zelosians as 
their jumping-off point, the agents schemetoslay 
the characters using a noxious black gas, hoping 
that Nul will interpret their deaths to mean that 
the darkness itself is stalking him. 

The characters’ own lives depend on their 
ability to stop this plan from coming to fruition. 


Adventure Idea 


The most obvious hook is the gravity well, 
which draws the character's ship into the sys- 
tem, since it is very unlikely that the characters 
filed an Imperial flight plan. 

This hook can then be used in conjunction 
with any of the following ideas. 


Adventure Idea 


While on another planet, the characters hear 
a rumor about Zelos II: “Though the day brings 
happiness and wealth to all, the dead walk at 
night on Zelos II.” This alone should be enough to 
intrigue the characters. 


Adventure Idea 


The New Republic contacts the characters 
and asks them to visit Zelos Il, for two reasons. 
The first task is to check out the possibility of 
swaying the sympathies of the population. The 
second task is to scout the system for Imperial 
influence. 

If the characters meet Commander Nul and 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


Fc 2210S |! 
RE SÁ 


-WA 


inquire about the Imperial presence, it will be 
met with blustery denials, which may seem phony 
but are actually sincere. Nul truly believes that 
the Empire pays heed to his wishes. 

The Imperial garrison routinely sends intelli- 
gence personnel disguised as traders into 
Kryndyn to check out visitors to the planet. If 
they catch wind of New Republic sympathizers in 
the city, this information will be immediately 
relayed to Luana. 


Adventure Idea 


The Zelosians hire the characters to act as 
security on a shipment of ore going by rail from 
Nul to Kryndyn. The train ride from Kryndyn to 
Nul is uneventful, and is used to show the charac- 
ters the route. The ore train has a crew of four 
Zelosians. The train departs Nul at midday, and 
the ride lasts five hours. 

After passing Lyrd, four and a half hours into 
the ride, the train derails and overturns. The 
crew is killed. The sun is going down. There are 
no other people on the nearby roads. Walking to 


either Lyrd or Kryndyn will take two hours. 
The characters are about to get a first-hand look 
at Zelos’ nocturnal predators. At least three en- 
counters will suffice. Then all the characters have 
to dois to go to the walls of a city and convince the 
night-frightened guards to let them in. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are hired by Commander Nul 
to make a landspeeder courier run to Lyn. They 
are to stay the night there, then bring back any 
return packages from the Lyn garrison com- 
mander. 

The evening they arrive in Lyn, the alarm is 
raised as several corpses begin to rise and wan- 
der about. The wrinkle that should get the char- 
acters interested is that two of the dead are 
Imperial stormtroopers, killed in an avalanche, 
who are now staggering around the perimeter of 
the village. 

It is possible for the characters to track the 
dead men back to their compound, which hap- 
pens to be the Imperial Garrison. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


77 


Planet Name Planet Profile 


ie a ere 
=n 
ae 


Major Imports: 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: 


Sar pe World Summary 


ORBITAL BODIES 


[Name | Tye | Moons | 
Face Pee ee i) 
———— > 
St aa S 
PS 5 Sete Say 
(Ss era PS 
as a eee) 
a a Se ee: 
_——— Ses ES 
SS SaaS ee 
a) a ae 
bir a ees 
Ss SSS aS 
gee enrages Pe 


78 Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Two 


The Saga Continues! - 


PARK FORCE RISING 
URCEBOOK 


STARS 
WARS 


° THE SECOND EDITION ° 


October 1992 


THE NEW REPUBLIC 


Ti = ER Aa = o~ it E Jal: = | a —= i = 
wh P latein rin E | = A A'A 
u li Ci d B _ i = ES I t a WE | = | ci H axy 


W / Be nan m "PE a ~ 
Volume AsO 
WEG FG VWV OG 


by John Terra 


Soar among the stars and discover worlds of danger, adventure and 
riches beyond imagining in the Star Wars galaxy- Challenge the perils of 
these planets and the might of the Empire! 


Planets of the Galaxy: Volume Two brings to life eight new planets for 
gamemasters and players alike. Battle the Imperial resistance on Aigara, or encounter 
the bizarre Ee on Atraken. Learn the secrets of Ergeshuls strange technology, or 
explore the gem mines of Gacerian and the dark streets of Korbin. From the flying 
serpents of Fyodos to the dread mysteries of the Valley of Umbra, Planets of the 
Galaxy: Volume Two will take you where you've never been before. 


80-page book features: 


e Eight new worlds, including information on 
native cultures, creatures, and points of 
interest. 

e Diagrams and adventure hooks that allow 
gamemasters to plunge right into the 
excitement. 

+ Imperial plots, hidden dangers, and new 
villains suitable for any Star Wars adventure. 

$ New alien species suitable for use as game- 
master characters or player characters. 


s Player handouts so players can immedi- 
ately get a feel for these planets. 


A supplement for Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game. 
For ages 12 and up. 


A West End Games 
A\| © ISBN 0-87431-180-2 
STARWARS RR 3 Box 2345 i 
S U < Honesdale, PA 18431 
P PLEMENT oe 
057 


NA WES iz ©, ™ & © 1992 Lucasfilm, Ltd. 
EMI) (LFL). All Rights Reserved. 
|/= END Trademarks of LFL used by. 

|J i Vale 


GA ME West End Games under 
GANIC ES o authorization., 


