Planets of the Galaxy 
Volume One | 


A galaxy of a thousand-thousand worlds 
comes to life in this new supplement. 
Adventure awaits! 


® 


m 2 


Planets of the Galaxy 


Volume One 


SEZ ‘i! i 
JA 
Q 
N S 
E = 


| As, (Ù 
ha i 


li 


| = 
tll ` 


\ 


A AE (nu 
Niel, 


Y 


= 
i 


— 
A 


AODA N 
; 3 


Editing: Bill Smith Ħ* Graphics: Stephen Crane, John Paul Lona 
Cover Art: Lucasfilm, Ltd. « Interior Art: Tim Eldred 
Playtesting and Advice: Greg Farshtey, Dr. Michael R. Fortner, 
Greg Gorden, Gary Haynes, Ron Seiden, Ed Stark 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter « Associate Publisher: Richard Hawran 
Editors: Greg Farshtey, Bill Smith, Ed Stark « Art Director: Stephen Crane 
Graphic Artists: Cathleen Hunter, John Paul Lona * Illustrator: Allen Nunis 
Production Manager: Steve Porpora *Ħ Sales Manager: Fitzroy Bonterre 
Sales Assistant: Maria Kammeler-Kean * Special Projects Manager: Ron Seiden 
Administrative Assistant: Jeff Dennis * Warehouse Manager: Ed Hill * Treasurer: Janet Riccio 


Published by 


Vases 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40050 


®,™ and © 1991 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Introduction 


introduction 


An Imperial Star Destroyer looms menacingly 
into view on the freighter’s viewscreen. As wave 
after wave of TIE fighters closes the distance, an 
engineer is frantically trying to fix the hyperdrive 
controls. Buttons, levers, and wires are all ma- 
nipulated with expert precision. Trails of smoke 
and sparks of unharnessed electrical energy deco- 
rate the control panel. 

As the blasts start rocking the nearly helpless 
ship, a last-ditch desperation yank on the 
hyperdrive motivator causes the stars to shift 
and spin. As the ship zooms out of harm’s way, 
one TIE comes so close the engineer can see that 
the Imperial pilot hadn’t shaved that morning. 


Welcome 


The Star Wars galaxy has a thousand, thou- 
sand settled worlds. Thousands of systems are 
waiting to be discovered, settled and tamed. It is 
a galaxy teeming with life, adventure and excite- 
ment. Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One provides 
all of the adventure, excitement, drama and chal- 
lenge that is Star Wars. 


New Planets 


This book is an excellent way to incorporate 
entirely new settings and situations into a cam- 
paign with a minimum of work. With the planets 
provided in this book, gamemasters and players 
have new planets on which to fight the forces of 
the Evil Galactic Empire. Or, players can take the 
role of independent freighter captains, looking 
for that big break that will set them up with a 
comfortable retirement, all the while dodging 
creditors, pirates and Imperial inspectors. 

Naturally, it is impossible to completely de- 
scribe a planet with just six pages. However, 
these entries are written to give gamemasters an 
understanding of the unique cultures, lifeforms, 


AR 
ARS 


personalities and locations that make the planet 
unusual and exciting. Complete with adventure 
ideas, maps andillustrations, each of these worlds 
can be suitable for many fantastic adventures. 
The planets in this book run the gamut from the 
dangerous, cutthroat trade world of Celanon, to 
the isolated tropical ocean planet of Baralou, Each 
of these worlds makes a difference in the Galactic 
Civil War between the Empire and Alliance, and 
there are other potential allies and villains, such as 
pirates, misguided research scientists, mega- 
corporations and freighter captains, to make ad- 
ventures more interesting and dangerous. 


Your Own Planets 


It has happened to every gamemaster. The 
soda sits on the desk, a bag of chips opened, a 
copy of each of the Star Wars sourcebooks and 
galaxy guides at hand, and just as the gamemas- 
ter opens his notebook, waiting for the next great 
inspiration to strike ... nothing. Noadventure, no 
world, no interesting characters. Your mind has 
drawn a blank. 

That’s where the Planet Generation System 
comes in. The system allows gamemasters to roll 
up worlds (leaving things to complete random 
chance), and also gives comprehensive, detailed 
hints on how to construct exciting and fun plan- 
ets. This chapter is filled with tips, comments 
and examples designed to jumpstart a stalled 
imagination. 


A long time ago, in a galaxy 
far, far away ... 

Return to the Star Wars universe. Grab your 
dice and your photocopies of the Planet Log (see 
page 80) and start creating your own planets, 
where legends will be born. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


—5TA 
-WA 


E Planet Generation 


System 


The Planet Generation System is designed to 
help gamemasters design exciting and fun new 
worlds for Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game. The 
system emphasizes the creation of unusual and 
memorable settings for roleplaying adventures, 
without requiring the gamemaster to generate 
reams of technical data. We hope it inspires great 
new worlds for your adventures ... 


Ready To Begin 

Thegamemaster will need several six-sided dice, 
a pencil, and photocopies of the Planet Log (page 
80). It is also advisable to have anotebook set aside 
to record the ideas that come to mind. 

The gamemaster can use the die charts found in 
this chapter to randomly generate worlds from 
scratch. Alternately, the gamemaster can use this 
rules section as a merely inspirational tool, using 
the descriptions and ideas herein as a baseline 
from which a comprehensive, detailed world 
emerges. The second method takes more time and 
consideration, but is also more satisfying. 


Keeping It Space Opera 

When dealing with a science fiction roleplaying 
game, it’s very easy to spend too much time design- 
ing one planet. After all, from our own experience, 
our home world is incredibly intricate and im- 
mensely interesting and the Star Wars galaxy has 
millions of stars with worlds equally diverse and 
fantastic. 

However, the nature of Star Wars necessitates 
hopping to two, three, four or even more new 
planets in the course of an adventure. This sys- 
tem is designed to help gamemasters generate 
the most important and interesting details of a 
new planet, and makes anumber ofassumptions: 


+ The gamemaster will only want to send players 
to interesting planets and systems. The odds of 
this game system are heavily weighted toward 
generating advanced or colonized planets. The 
civilizations of the Star Wars universe have been 
spacefaring for so many centuries that most 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


advanced civilizations (and a lot of primitive 
ones as well) have been discovered and assimi- 
lated into galactic culture. 


e There are isolated sections of the galaxy that 
offer undiscovered civilizations and other chal- 
lenges, and they can also be generated with this 
system. They can exist for whatever reason: they 
are far out on the end ofa spiral arm; or, they are 
difficult to get to because they are surrounded by 
gas clouds, near rogue planets or subjected to 
huge ion storms. 


¢ Only thesystem’s planet of prime importance is 
fleshed out here. Other worlds can be developed 
independently, but virtually everything of inter- 
est and value is on the prime world. 


è This system results in “finished concept” worlds, 
and doesn’t spend much time explaining how a 
particular planet got a certain way; it just is. An 
explanation of the culture and history takes afew 
minutes to formulate, but the results are worth it. 


Planet Generation System 


* Completely random rolls on these charts may 
generate seemingly contradictory results. The 
gamemaster always has the option of ignoring 
results that are unsuitable. However, knowing 
the diversity to be found in the Star Wars galaxy, 
virtually any result is explainable. 


e This system generalizes the type of terrain 
found on the planets. While few worlds have 
uniform terrain everywhere, this system give one 
or two dominant terrain types so the gamemas- 
ter can quickly sum up the planet. 


e Optional modifiers listed after some results are 
just that: optional. The gamemaster has every 
right to fudge die rolls (or just arbitrarily decide 
upon a result). This system is only a tool for the 
gamemaster to create fun worlds; the gamemas- 
ter need not be subservient to a series of charts. 
All modifiers are cumulative. 


e If an incompatible condition result is rolled, 
discard it and select a compatible result. 


Planet Function 


Since Star Wars is space opera, and leans 
heavily toward action and strong story telling, 
the most important aspect to players is what can 
be found or explored on the planet. The following 
results give some indication as to what types of 
industries and activities are common on a par- 
ticular planet. For greater diversity, the game- 
master may roll on this chart multiple times. 

To determine the planet function, roll two six 
sided dice. Read each number separately (this is a 
six-sided percentile system; do not add them to- 
gether foratotal). This generates totals between 11 
and 66. Itis best to use two different color dice (say, 
red and blue), reading one color die before the 
other. For example, if you're reading the red die 
first, and you rolla ‘3’ on the red die and a ‘2’ onthe 
blue die, your roll is a ‘32’ (Hidden Base planet). 


11: Abandoned Colony 


This is a planet that was settled by another 
planet, a company or some other wealthy 
instituion. Then, for some reason, the colony was 
left behind: the homeworld could have been 
struck by plague or war, or the company could 
have run out of money. The planet might have 
been evacuated (only leaving ruins), or supply 
ships just never arrived, in which case the colo- 
nists were on their own: they may have devolved 
into barbarism and anarchy. 


12: Academic 

Educational institutions are what is most im- 
portant to the economy of this planet. Academic 
worlds typically have many universities and col- 
leges, which may be private, corporate or state 
run. 


Planet Generation System Ý A fA Wes 
SS —— -e WARS 


Options for low Tech Level worlds are varied: 
the university was purposefully established to 
remove students from the temptations of mod- 
ern comforts. Or, the natives may have had some 
contact with free-traders, and have committed 
all of their efforts to unlocking the secrets of 
modern technology. 

This result doesn’t necessarily mean academic 
work towards a degree. Trade schools, institutions 
dedicated to unlocking the secrets of the Force 
(these will always be well hidden since the Em- 
peror has madeit a priority to kill Force users), and 
survival schools are possible options. 

Optional Modifiers: +1 Starport; +1 Tech Level. 


13: Administrative/Government 


This world is bureaucracy at its largest. The 
main industry is the orderly (or at least man- 
aged) operation of a government, business, or 
other large institution. Imperial Sector Capitals 
often qualify for this designation, but the 
homeworlds of major, galaxy-spanning corpora- 
tions and institutions such as BoSS (Bureaus of 
Ships and Services) may also be considered Ad- 
ministrative in nature. Low Tech Level planets 
could also be administrative, especially if the 
economy is directed entirely by the government. 

Optional Modifiers: +1 Starport; +1 Tech Level. 


14-21: Agriculture 


This planet is dedicated to the production of 
food. The types of products can include grains, 
vegetables, fruits, meats, vitamins, dietary supple- 
ments, and water. Many ocean planets also rely 
on agriculture, through fishing or algae and vita- 
min farms. 

Incompatible Conditions: Asteroid Belt, Arti- 
ficial Planet Type; Barren Terrain 


22: Colony 


This planet has been established and spon- 
sored by another, more developed planet or 
corporation. Colonies are generally dependent 
upon the sponsor for supplies, and typically are 
subservient to its dictates. Colony worlds aren’t 
independent entities, although there may be a 
separatist movement. Colony planets generally 
produce goods only for consumption by the spon- 
sor, and thus are often prevented from develop- 
ing a self-sufficient economy or acquiring signifi- 
cant wealth. Many colonies are devoted to Agri- 
culture and Mining. 


23: Disaster 

Disaster planets have gone through cataclys- 
mic changes that have dramatically altered the 
world’s history. The event could have been a war 
that used atomic weapons, a plague, an indus- 
trial accident, a collision with a large stellar body 
(such as an asteroid) or a dramatic change in the 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


ee T A Ro _£ £|aiet Generation System 


-WA 


nature of the system's star (such as when stars 
balloon into red giants, incinerating all of the 
inner planets and drastically changing the cli- 
mate of the surviving worlds). 

The disaster could have occurred just a few 
years ago (generally making the world very dan- 
gerous), or it could have happened decades or 
eons ago (in which case the danger from the 
actual disaster may have passed, but the after- 
math could be devastating). 

Optional Modifiers: (If recent calamity) -3 
Spaceport; -2 Tech Level; +3 Atmosphere. 


24: Entertainment 


This planet’s business is show business. 
Holovids, musical groups and the businesses 
that distribute their works to the general public 
are dominant here. Some planets specialize in 
sporting events (such as swoop races), amuse- 
ment parks, gambling or tourism. 


25-26: Exploration 

This planet, and the whole system for that 
matter, has seldom been visited, until now, when 
the characters have arrived. Exploration planets 
tend to have primitive technology levels (if there 


(I eae 
s i 
| (lia 


M ili | 
N ' n i Th 


ji! (i 
Ht Mi it 
Cie mr 


eye 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


are even sentient races). There are few urban 
areas, with the emphasis on dangerous wilder- 
ness. Lost artifacts from past ages may be on 
these planets, or there may simply be wandering 
tribes of aliens who are eager to trade. These 
planets may be rich in natural resources. 

There may be some hint of galactic civilization 
in these systems, or on the planet in question — 
perhaps a secretive trader has retired here, or 
fugitives may be hiding from the Empire. These 
locales are excellent for hidden bases, or if near 
important trade routes, may be a convenient 
stopover for independent traders. 

Optional Modifiers: -2 Spaceport;-2 Tech Level. 


31: Hidden Base 


There is a base on this planet that someone 
wants to keep a secret. This immediately sets up 
a conflict for the characters, since that someone 
will probably hunt them down to prevent anyone 
else from finding out about the base. 

Alliance and pirate bases are logical choices. 
Other options may include the Imperial military 
or corporate interests (possibly a weapons or 
biological engineering research facility). Wealthy 
individuals may have a private hideaway. 


——- 
————> 


32-33: Homeworld 


This result means the planet is a homeworld 
for an established alien race. It could be Calamari 
(home of the Mon Calamari and the Quarren), 
Sullust (home of the Sullustans), or one of thou- 
sands of other homeworlds throughout the gal- 
axy. Most of these planets have modernstarports, 
asophisticated trader network and a high level of 
technology. Almost all homeworlds of Atomic 
level or higher have already been subdued by the 
Empire unless the characters are in unexplored 
regions of space. 


34: Luxury Goods 


The planet produces luxury goods, such as 
liquor, finished gemstones (such as the Garnib 
crystals), spices, art or other goods. This planet 
may be self-sufficient, or may be devoted exclu- 
sively to producing the luxury good (which would 
requiring importing everything else). 


35-41: Manufacturing/Processing 


The inhabitants of this planet devote most of 
their time to manufacturing goods. The goods 
generally fit into three distinct categories: Low 
Tech, Mid Tech, and High Tech. These goods 
may be for consumption by the planet's own 
residents, or they may be for export to other 
planets. They may be finished items, which are 
shipped directly to markets, or the planet may be 
an intermediary step, whereby the planet takes 
in raw materials from one planet, and then pro- 
cesses the material so that it can be used in the 
production of a finished good, which is manufac- 
tured someplace else. 


Low Tech 


Low-tech items are simple manufactured 
goods, such as handiworks, native crafts, furni- 
ture, basic medicines and woven cloth. The goods 
may be mass produced in factories, or may be 
made individually by skilled craftsmen. 


Mid Tech 


More complex items are produced on this 
planet. Textiles, mechanical weaponry (projec- 
tile weapons), pharmaceuticals, paper goods, 
vehicles, and primitive versions of high-tech 
goods, such as computers and plastics, can be 
manufactured on these planets. Assembly line 
factories are frequently necessary to produce 
these goods. 


High Tech 


Modern computers, blaster weapons, 
superhard plastics and alloys like transparisteel, 
polymers, chemicals, bioengineered life forms, 
advanced bioimmunal medicines, cybernetics, 
medical equipment, Droids, vehicles and 


Planet Generation System ===. N ee 
SEARS 


starships are all considered high-tech goods. 
High-tech goods almost always require advanced 
manufacturing methods. 

Optional Modifiers: Mid-Tech Planets: +2 
Starport; +2 Tech Level. High-Tech Planets: +3 
Starport; +4 Tech Level 
42: Military 

This planet is an important Imperial military 
facility. It has one or several large bases. Sector 
capitals, planets near strategic trade routes, Im- 
perial ship yards, and weapons manufacturing 


planets have huge military bases. 
Optional Modifiers: +3 Starport; +2 Tech Level 


43-46: Mining 

Mining planets depend upon the minerals and 
metals locked beneath the ground. These planets 
truly drive the Imperial economy, because without 
the raw materials there would be no starships or 
vehicles. Blaster gases are also mined, but are 
taken from gas giants (such as the Tibanna gas 
mine on Bespin). 

Optional Modifiers: +2 Starport; +1 Tech Level 


51-55: Natural Resources 


These planets utilize naturally occurring re- 
sources such as wood (for logging), animal skins, 
and glaciers (“harvested"” for fresh water). Other 
products that could be harvested are raw mate- 
rials for medicines and pharmaceuticals, and 
may be either plant or animal derived. This cat- 
egory differs from Agriculture because the prod- 
ucts aren't food. 


56: Research 

These planets are used for scientific and aca- 
demic research. The world may have abundant 
resources, but the particular company or univer- 
sity may have an exclusive charter and is allowed 
to decide who develops the planet. Research may 
befor purely scientific or academic knowledge, but 
other planets, like Gorsh, are studied for new 
chemical compounds with practical applications. 


61: Service 


Service planets tend to have a multi-classed 
social system and great wealth. The exclusive 
higher classes have control over the wealth and 
resources, and the lower classes provide ser- 
vices and goods to the wealthier individuals. 
Service planets tend toward direct sale to con- 
sumers, or may be devoted to banking, legal 
services, medical services, or financial markets. 

Optional Modifiers: +1 Starport; +2 Tech Level 


62-63: Subsistence 


A planet with a Subsistence economy is working 
hard just to survive. There is little to send to other 
worlds to generate income, and if the planet has to 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


au’ | AR ț Planet Generation System 


eee x a 


import many goods, the debt could be staggering. 
Another optionis a planet that depended upon one 
product which has lost a great deal of its value, and 
as aresult, unemployment and poverty have grown 
dramatically in recent times. 


64-66: Trade 


Trade planets tend to be the most active and 
exciting planets in the Star Wars galaxy. They are 
blessed with being on a good trade route, and as 
aresult, everyone stops here to sell goods, make 
deals and purchase goods for resale at other 
locations. Sector capitals, planets that produce 
many different products and planets with wealthy 
populations are often trade planets. 

Optional Modifiers: +3 Starport; +2 Tech Level. 


Government 


Government is the means by which a society 
determines what is permissible and what is for- 
bidden. Governments can regulate business or 
corporate behavior, or even eliminate entities 
such as businesses. They can severely curb a 
citizen's rights, or be very permissive. 

The following results determine what type of 
government has been established on this planet, 
but it is up to the gamemaster to determine what 
the government in question believes in — these 
categories simply detail by what means the gov- 
ernment operates. If the gamemaster wishes to 
generate more variety, roll on this chart multiple 
times to determine secondary governments or to 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


determine a strong influence within the prime 
system of government. 

One thing to remember is that most planets in 
the galaxy are under the firm control of the Empire. 
This chart assumes that the planet is under Impe- 
rial control (with the notable exception of the 
Rebel Alliance result), although many primitive 
planets (Feudal or Stone Tech Levels) have been 
left alone simply because they offer too few re- 
sources or tax revenues to be worth the effort. 

Most Imperial planets have been allowed to 
retain their traditional form of government, but 
all Imperial worlds have troops and equipment 
deployed to help the local population remember 
who is in control of the situation. Many, but not 
all, planets have Imperial Governors who act as 
liaison between the Empire and the planetary 
government. On some worlds, the Governor has 
assumed control (an action well within his or her 
authority). Particularly troublesome worlds are 
often subdued by Imperial military crackdowns. 

To determine the government type, use the six- 
sided percentile system. This generates totals be- 
tween 11 and 66. It is best to use two different color 
dice, reading one color die before the other. For 
example, if you’re reading the red die first, and you 
rolla‘5’ onthe red die anda ‘6’ on the blue die, your 
roll is a ‘56’ (Representative Democracy). 


11: Alliance/Federation 


Several different groups (tribes, nation-states, 
corporations or whatever else — you decide) 
have formed an alliance. The degree of coopera- 


tion and the vitality of the alliance differs from 
situation to situation. Typical purposes for alli- 
ance include an improved economy, mutual de- 
fense, or the arrival of a situation so compelling 
that the different groups can put aside their 
problems to accomplish “a greater good.” Be- 
trayal is always a possibility, especially if there 
are other competing alliances. 


12: Anarchy 


Anarchists stand for the individual and his or 
her rights above all else, including government. 
Anarchist governments could conceivably be 
quite elaborate, but would exist only to insure 
that each individual has complete freedom. 

Anarchism is commonly perceived as a lack of 
law and order, and on many planets, that is 
indeed the truth. 


13-16: Competing States 


Several nation-states, tribes or corporations are 
actively competing for control of the planet. The 
intensity and type of competition varies, and can 
range from economic competition to open war. 


21-22: Corporate Owned 


This planet is owned by a corporation, trade 
guild or other large business interest. Most of 
these planets produce goods for use or resale by 
the parent corporation, Other Corporate planets 
are for the pleasure and relaxation of the execu- 
tives and employees — in essence, giant recre- 
ation planets. Residents are almost always em- 
ployees of the corporation, and have strict guide- 
lines and rules to follow, such as having to pay 
rent on corporate housing, or being required to 
purchase goods only from corporate retailers. 

The corporation is allowed to do whatever it 
likes (with the agreement of the Empire, of 
course). Conditions on planets are widely vari- 
able, from harsh and repressive to agreeable and 
comfortable. 

Optional Modifiers: +3 Spaceport; +2 Tech Level. 


23-24: Dictatorship 


Dictatorships are commanded by a single indi- 
vidual, such as a charismatic military officer, or 
an insane politician who will execute anyone. 
Dictatorships are almost always repressive and 
intolerant of divergent political, philosophical 
and social views. 


25: Family 

The most important social organization on the 
planet is the family. There are a variety of pos- 
siblescenarios, including a pre-tribal state, where 
families have little or no technology and con- 
stantly engage in warfare with each other. At 
higher Tech Levels, asmall group of elite families 


Planet Generation S STEM m A Wes 
WARS 


could control the government, either overtly or 
through behind the scenes manipulation of the 
government in power. 


26-31: Feudalism 


A multi-structured social system, in which 
important officials (nobles or royalty) are en- 
trusted with a specific area of land. They must 
manage the territory, provide tax revenues to 
higher-level officials and make sure that the com- 
mands of these higher-level officials are carried 
out. 


32: Guild/Professional Organizations 


The planet is controlied by a guild dedicated 
to the advancement ofa particular occupation or 
philosophy. Many Trade planets are run by trade 
guilds (see Celanon). These guilds may also con- 
trol certain portions of the government, and 
subtly direct the kind of legislation and decisions 
that are made. 


33-42: Imperial Governor 


This is a planet where the designated Imperial 
Governor has taken control, either due to civil 
unrest, sheer ego, or belief that the previous gov- 
ernment was inept, disloyal or unresponsive. 


43-45: Military 

Military planets are controlled by either the 
Imperial military or a local military organization. 
They tend to have governments which perpetu- 
ate only the military structure, ignoring theneeds 
and desires of the civilian populations — martial 
law is a way of life. Harsh, brutal crackdowns can 
occur with only minor provocation. Civil rights 
take a low priority when compared to accom- 
plishing government goals. 


46-52: Monarchy 


A type of government where absolute author- 
ity is granted to one individual, often called aking 
or queen. The leadership position is normally 
granted by heredity. Planets may have patriar- 
chal (only male rulers) or matriarchal (only fe- 
male rulers) societies. 


53: Organized Crime 

A planetary or galaxy-wide criminal organiza- 
tion has established a government loyal to the 
criminal leaders. Organized crime planets are 
typically run so that only those who are 
unswervingly loyal to the criminal organization 
receive advancement and promotions; opponents 
are simply eliminated. 

Organized crime may also covertly control a 
government by bribing or blackmailing officials, 
orthreatening their families. These governments 
are typically oppressive. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


-WA 


54: Participatory Democracy 


Citizens vote directly on important issues 
(some advanced planets have citizens vote on 
virtually every proposed bill). 


55: Rebel Alliance 


A government that supports the Rebel Alliance 
and its objectives. Few planets can risk openly 
supporting the Alliance (Alderaan is a painful ex- 
ample of what happens to openly rebellious worlds), 
but several planets secretly shuttle funds to Rebel- 
lion coffers, or offer safe passage for Rebel agents, 
supplies and weaponry. Hidden Rebel safe worlds 
also qualify for this designation. 


56: Representative Democracy 


Planets witha Representative Democracy have 
citizens choose officials, who are then charged 
with representing the “public interest.” These 
type of governments can experience radical shifts 
in goals and policy ifthe population is unsatisfied 
with performance and threatens to remove the 
representatives from office. 


61: Ruler by Selection/Rite 


The ruler is chosen by a series of trials, physi- 
cal, mental or both. While these governments are 
often found on more primitive planets, advanced 
civilizations may use complex testing methods 
to determine who is most fit to govern a planet, 
nation or locality. 


62: Theocracy 


A government run by a religious organization. 
Typically, the citizens are required to participate 
in certain religious rites and profess faith in the 


Regulated Environments 


Space stations, asteroid belt cities, 
domed cities and other artificial environ- 
ments are called regulated environments. It 
is assumed that these environments are set 
for the most comfortable conditions for the 
species that built the environment, or inthe 
case of humans, a Temperate temperature, 
Standard gravity, and a day/night cycle 
hovering abound 20-25 standard hours. 

However, should there bea catastrophic 
disaster, the natural environment may come 
rushing into the facility, or things such as 
oxygen reprocessors or repulsorgrav gen- 
erators may fail. If the regulated environ- 
ment is a domed city or a construct within 
agas giant, theimmense gravitational forces 
and atmospheric pressures may cause the 
facility to collapse. Filters could fail, releas- 
ing all kinds of toxins into the environment. 
While accidents should be rare, the poten- 
tial for disaster is enormous. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


tenets of the religion. Theocracies may be highly 
tolerant of divergent views, but some are also 
quite repressive. 


63-66: Tribal 


Tribal governments seldom control morethan a 
small portion of the planet. Tribes are groups of 
many families who have banded together for mu- 
tual survival, or who share common beliefs. Tribes 
are often precursors to city-states and nation-state 
governments, but many highly advanced and so- 
phisticated tribal governments are found on plan- 
ets throughout the Star Wars universe. Tribes can 
be nomadic, depending almost entirely upon hunt- 
ing and foraging for food, or they can settle, which 
indicates the development of agriculture. 


Planet Type 


The following table determines the basic type 
of world that the civilization in question has 
developed on. Roll 2D and find the results below. 


2-9: Terrestrial 


The planet is a typical ball of rock and metals 
orbiting a sun. Most terrestrial planets have at- 
mospheres, and many have developed life. Move 
on to the “Climate” section below. 


10: Satellite (Normally Gas Giant) 


This world is a moon orbiting a gas giant 
(much like Yavin Four as seen in Star Wars: A New 
Hope). Since there is a civilization here, it prob- 
ably has a breathable atmosphere and supports 
life, or there were important resources too valu- 
able to pass up. Move on to the Climate section 
below. Satellites are almost always tide-locked to 
the gas giants they orbit. 


11: Asteroid Belt 


Asteroid belts are either the remnants of plan- 
ets shattered by collisions with large stellar bod- 
ies or merely portions of stellar material that 
never coalesced into a planet. Settled asteroid 
belts are often rich in minerals and metals, and 
their small size prevents them from supporting 
an atmosphere. Most asteroid belt civilizations 
are either subterranean or have sealed and prob- 
ably domed buildings built on the surface. Since 
asteroids are naturally airless, civilizations re- 
quire regulated environments. Read the sidebar 
labeled “Regulated Environments” and then move 
ahead to the section labeled “Starport.” Asteroid 
Belt settlements required a Tech Level of Atomic, 
Information or Space to be established (if the 
settlement was abandonned, the civilization may 
have devolved and lost Tech Levels). 

Optional Modifiers: -2 Population (initial roll 
only) 

Incompatible Conditions: Agriculture, 
Homeworld Planet Function 


12: Artificial 


Artificial results indicate orbiting space sta- 
tions, domed cities built on planets with toxic 
atmospheres, and great floating complexes built 
in gas giants (such as Cloud City). All artificial 
settlements need some means of sustaining them- 
selves (such as huge repulsor engines to keep 
Cloud City aloft, or sealed domes to keep the 
toxins out of the city). Since artificial planets 
require a regulated environment, read the “Regu- 
lated Environments” sidebar and then skip to the 
section labeled “Starport.” Artificial settlements 
require a Tech Level of Information or Space. 

Optional Modifiers: -2 Population (initial roll 


only) 


Terrain 


The gamemaster must determine the domi- 
nant terrain for the planet. There can be many 
different types of terrain on a planet, but the 
dominant terrain is the one that the characters 
will interact with most often. Diverse planets 
may have several major terrain types. Addition- 
ally, the planet’s terrain may be a combination of 
types (such as mountainous forest). 

While these classifications provide basic in- 
formation as to the terrain types, the gamemas- 
ter must customize them to match the unique 
nature of the planet. Each terrain entry has a 
listing of Compatible Conditions, which is where 
these terrain types are most likely to be found. 
Some terrain types also have Incompatible Con- 
ditions, where they will seldom be found. If a 
quality isn’t listed (such as a Moderate Hydro- 
sphere, for example), the conditions are neither 
particularly favorable for the terrain, nor do they 
preclude the existence of the terrain type. If the 
gamemaster rolls incompatible terrain results, 
he may opt to discard the results, or reason 
through a really unusual situation that allows 
this result (this is the most entertaining option). 

To determine the terrain type, roll on the six- 
sided percentile system used for the Planet Func- 
tion and Government sections. 


11: Barren 

Barren planets are typically Arid, possibly with 
hostileatmospheres. The groundis extremely hard, 
dry and is hostile to most forms of life. There may 
be large rocks on the surface or embedded in the 
rock hard ground. Minerals and metals may be 
found. Barren planets are predisposed to 
unbreathable atmospheres. 

Compatible Conditions: Arid, Dry Hydro- 
sphere 

Incompatible Conditions: Moist, Saturated 
Hydrosphere 

Optional Modifiers: -2 Population (initial roll 
only); +3 Atmosphere 


Planet Generation System D A (A Wer 


ARST 


12-13: Cave 


The planet is dominated by an immense net- 
work of caves running throughout the crust. 
These caves are often caused by volcanic activ- 
ity, andifthe activity is ongoing, areas can quickly 
become dangerous as lava and toxic gases return 
to fill the caves they created. Cave planets almost 
always have Type II atmospheres. 

Example: Sullust 

Optional Modifiers: +2 Atmosphere; -2 Popu- 
lation (initial roll only) 


14: Crater Field 


Crater fields can occur in virtually any other 
type of terrain, and they are the result of continu- 
ous impacts from meteorites, resulting in huge 
cratered areas on the planet. The impacts could 
have ended millions of years ago, or they may 
still be ongoing. Large enough meteors could 
cause significant climate changes on a planet by 
throwing huge clouds of soil into the air or caus- 
ing earthquakes. Planets with light gravities are 
favorable for crater fields. 

Example: Essowyn 

incompatible Conditions: Thick atmospheres 


15-16: Desert 


Deserts are typically found on dry and arid 
planets, and support only a minimum of life due 
to alack of moisture. Deserts can be found in any 
temperature zone. Warm desert areas can be 
very dangerous because travelers can easily be- 
come dehydrated (an exposure suit will prevent 
dehydration). 

Example: Tatooine 

Compatible Conditions: Arid, Dry Hydro- 
sphere 

Incompatible Conditions: Moist, Saturated 
Hydrosphere 


21-24: Forest 


Forests occur most commonly in temperate 
zones, but they can also occur in very cold or 
warm areas. If they receive a great deal of precipi- 
tation in tropical areas, they are called rain for- 
ests. Forests may be active year round, or may be 
seasonal (most of the plants go into hibernation 
during cooler seasons). They generally receive 
ample rainfall. 

Example: Endor 

Compatible Conditions: Moderate, Moist Hy- 
drosphere; Hot, Temperate, Cool Temperature 

Incompatible Conditions: Arid Hydrosphere; 
Frigid, Searing Temperature 


25-26: Glacier 


Glaciers are huge, frozen sheets of ice that can 
be several kilometers thick. Icebergs are chunks 
of glaciers that have been broken off and now 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


— es Manet Generation System 


"WA 


float in oceans. Glaciers grind the land beneath 
them, constantly reforming it. Glaciers can occur 
on land, or above ocean. 

Example: Hoth 

Compatible Conditions: Moist, Saturated Hy- 
drosphere; Cool, Frigid Temperature 

Incompatible Conditions: Arid, Dry Hydro- 
sphere; Searing, Hot, Temperate Temperature 


31-32: Jungle 

Jungles are any area overgrown by plant life, 
and often include low-lying wetlands that sup- 
port many forms of plant and animal life. They 
are often warm at least a substantial portion of 
the local year. The ground can be moist or dry. 
They are excellent incubators for life, from plants 
to insects and animals. They require ample wa- 
ter, but can be warm or cool. 

Example: Veron 

Compatible Conditions: Moderate, Moist, Satu- 
rated Hydrosphere; Searing, Hot, Temperate Tem- 
perature 

Incompatible Conditions: Arid, Dry Hydro- 
sphere; Cool, Frigid Temperature. 


33-34: Mountain 


Mountainous planets have been (or still are) 
home to a great deal of geologic activity. The 
mountains can range from small hills (under a 
kilometer tall) to huge peaks several kilometers 
tall. Depending upon the planet’s atmosphere, 
plant life, and soil, mountain areas can support a 
variety of plant forms from trees to grasses. 
Peaks of mountains on temperate and cold plan- 
ets may be snow capped. Snow capped moun- 
tains can be quite dangerous because of ava- 
lanches. 

Example: Ryloth 

Incompatible Conditions: Saturated Hydro- 
sphere 


35-41: Ocean 


Ocean planets are dominated by huge bodies 
of water or other liquid. The oceans can be very 
deep, or merely large and shallow, depending 
upon whether or not geologic activity has cre- 
ated great mountainous regions (islands are of- 
ten the peaks of small mountains that emanate 
from the ocean's floor). These planets may be 
searing to frigid, although frigid oceans will often 
be covered by huge glacial sheets of ice. 

Example: Baralou 

Compatible Conditions: Moderate, Moist, Satu- 
rated Hydrosphere 

Incompatible Conditions: Arid, Dry Hydro- 
sphere 

Optional Modifiers: -1 Population (initial roll 


only) 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


42-44: Plain 

Plains areas are simply huge, flat expanses of 
life, typically supporting grasses and bushes as 
primary forms of plant life. Grasslands can be 
found in virtually any hydrosphere and tempera- 
ture range, but they are most common in tropical 
and temperate dry regions. Very cold, dry grass- 
lands are often called tundra, and very warm, dry 
grasslands are often called savannahs. 

Example: Celanon 

Compatible Conditions: Dry, Moderate, Moist 
Hydrosphere; Hot, Temperate, Cool Temperature 

Incompatible Conditions: Arid, Saturated 
Hydrosphere; Searing, Frigid Temperature 


45-46: Plateau 


Plateaus are large sections of mostly flat land 
that are elevated above other portions of nearby 
land. They typically occur in the interior of con- 
tinents. On a plateau, virtually any type of terrain 
can be found. 

Incompatible Conditions: Saturated Hydro- 
sphere 


51-52: Urban 


This result means that most of the planet is 
covered by artificial constructions, typically huge 
city sprawls. This is indicative of a very high 
population, and most so-called urban planets 
concentrate on trade, manufacturing or adminis- 
tration. Agriculture can sometimes be conducted 
in huge hydroponics factories, or beneath the 
surface if the plants don’t require sunlight (typi- 
cal of mosses and fungi). Urban terrains can be 
layered on top of most other terrain conditions, 


Planet Generation System snneees EE BP ees 
WARS” 


Seasonal Changes 


The seasons ona planet are caused by the amount of axial 
tilt. If the planet's axis of rotation is perfectly “vertical” 
(perpendicular to the plane ofits orbit) there are no seasons, 
and the temperature is constant year round. However, there 
will still be temperature changes due to weather. 

However, if the axial tilt isn’t “vertical,” the planet experi- 
ences seasons. The greater the degree of tilt, the more 
extreme the seasonal change. Planets with a high degree of 
tilt experience extreme seasons. One side of the planet will 
have brutally cold winters, with continual darkness. At the 
same time, the opposite side of the planet will experience a 
sweltering summer and continual sunlight, with tempera- 
tures well above boiling. As the planet circles the sun, there 
will be a brief period of moderation, and then the side of the 
world that was previously locked in the grip of winter is now 
exposed to searing sunlight and the side that was experienc- 
ing a deadly summer is now exposed to the cold and dark of 
space. As the planet swings back around the sun, there again 
is a brief moderate period, before the planet returns to the 
seasons originally described. 


No Slight Extreme 
Axial Tilt Axial Tilt Axial Tilt 


No Seasons Produces Seasons Extreme Seasons 


CPA? TS 


AXIS OF AXIS OF 
ROTATION ROTATION 


such as plateaus, mountains, and plains. In addi- 
tion to habitable cities, urban results may indi- 
cate huge factories and refining facilites. 

Aside from buildings, many Urban settings 
will have extensive cultivated areas for agricul- 
ture. This classification can include any devel- 
oped area that isn’t wilderness. 

Example: Kari (see Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp 
Freighters) 

Optional Modifiers: +1 Population (initial roll 


only) 


53-61 Wetlands 


Wetlands are moist low-lying wet areas, and 
play a vital role in most eco-systems. They can 
take the form of ponds, marshes, or swamps, and 
support bushes, trees, grasses and many differ- 
ent forms of life. 

Example: Gorsh 

Incompatible Conditions: Arid, Dry 
Hyrdosphere; Frigid, Searing Temperature 


62-63: Volcanic 

Volcanoes and lava pools cover the planet, indi- 
cating a very high level of geologic activity. Volca- 
nic planets often have high levels of ash and toxic 
gases in the atmosphere, and the lava, of course, is 


very dangerous. However, these planets often have 
high quality metals in their crust. Volcanic planets 
often have hazardous atmospheres. 
Incompatible Conditions: Type! atmospheres 
Optional Modifiers: -2 Population (initial roll 
only); +3 Atmosphere 


64-66: Special Terrain 

These are unusual terrains that demonstrate 
the incredible versatility of the Star Wars uni- 
verse. These terrain types can also explain seem- 
ingly contradictory terrain rolls. What follows 
are some examples: 


* Crystal forests and fields. The crystals may be 
immensely valuable, or merely scenic. They may 
also be a hazard if they magnify incoming sun- 
light, possibly blinding careless travelers. 


+ Planets with ammonia oceans, where the land 
masses are actually rock-solid ice fields. This 
type of condition requires very low tempera- 
tures and often has a Type IV atmosphere. 


+ Underground forests, found in great subterra- 
nean caverns. The trees and bushes derive most 
of their energy from the geothermal energy re- 
leased by the interior of the planet. 


e Huge canyons cover the planet. 


+ A planet where most of the water is trapped on 
high plateaus, and the lowest sections of the 
planet are actually parched deserts. 


e Planets like Kashyyyk, with several distinct 
“bio-levels,” where the type of creature and its 
behaviors is distinctly different based on the 
altitude. This can be accomplished through use 
of mountains, huge trees, or even planets where 
there are many lighter than air gases and many 
flying and gliding creatures have internal blad- 
ders for constant lift. 


$ Planets that are covered with toxic and radioac- 
tive pools. They may have been mining planets 
that were just tapped out and converted to waste 
dumps. Whole new lifeforms (and hardy ones at 
that) could evolve in these conditions. 


e A planet with an unusual substance that mixes 
with water, turning into a jellied goo at tempera- 
tures up to 80 degrees Celsius. In warmer seasons, 
there are huge flowing oceans of the muck, while in 
winter, the goo hardens, expands and covers much 
of the planet (much like a hot-weather glacier). 


Temperature 


This classification represents the average tem- 
perature on the planet’s surface. Most planets 
have several varying temperature bands, from 
the coldest (polar regions) to warmest (equato- 
rial region). The “true” temperature of an area 
can be altered by local geographic features. Sea- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


-0 EEE Planet Generation System 


-WA 


sonal changes also greatly alter temperature (see 
“Seasonal Changes” sidebar). Some planets are 
trapped in what is called tide lock (see “Tide 
Lock” sidebar). Still other planets have elliptical 
orbits (see “Elliptical Orbits” sidebar). 

All of these possible combinations give the 
gamemaster a great deal of diversity and choice 
when designing the planet. These special results 
are not incorporated into the random tables so 
that the gamemaster can choose exactly which 
effects are most useful. Roll 2D to determine the 
average temperature. 


2: Searing 

Searing planets average 60 degrees Celsius or 
more, and are hostile to most life forms, although 
standing bodies of water are possible as long as 
the average temperature isn’t near the boiling 
point (100 degrees Celsius). Most civilizations 
will tend to cluster near the more moderate polar 
regions or underground. 


3-4: Hot 


Hot planets average between 30 and 56 de- 
grees Celsius, and while generally uncomfort- 
able, are not nearly as hostile as searing planets. 


5-9: Temperate 

Temperate planets average between -5 and 29 
degrees Celsius, and are in the most comfortable 
temperature bands for humans and other life 
forms. 


Tide Lock 


Tide locked planets are trapped with one 
half of the planet continuously facing the 
sun and the other facing out into space. 
They cannot rotate, and thus there is no 
day/night cycle. These planets are almost 
always uninhabitable, but there are excep- 
tions (some planets have a habitable zone 
onthe boundary ofthe night and day sides). 
If a planet is tide locked, ignore the effects 
of axial tilt. 


ee et 
GC) | 
Pá 

S” 


The same side of the planet faces 
the sun at all times. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Elliptical Orbits 


Some planets orbit their star in unusual 
orbits, with one part of the orbit coming 
much closer to the sun than the rest of the 
orbit. These elliptic orbits account for huge 
seasonal variations, and the lengths of sea- 
sons are not equal. In extreme situations, 
the planet is locked in a deadly cold winter 
for years at a time, but as it swoops in close 
to the star, the planet quickly thaws and life 
returns, all within the span of a few weeks. 


10-11: Cool 


Cool planets average between -20 and 4 de- 
grees Celsius. Most cool planets do not support 
ahugenumber of life forms, but life can still adapt 
to planetary conditions. Plant life may be com- 
mon if it contains compounds that prevents vital 
water-based fluids from freezing. 


12: Frigid 
Frigid planets average -21 degrees Celsius or 
less, and are often inhospitabte. If the hydro- 


sphere is Temperate, Moist, or Saturated, the 
planet may be covered with ice glaciers. 


Gravity 


Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game uses four 
classifications to indicate the gravity of a world. 
As indicated before, most regulated environments 
will have a gravity of Standard. 


Zero Gravity 


Asteroids, comets and other very small stellar 
bodies have effectively zero gravity, which also 
eliminates the possibility of an atmosphere (bar- 
ring theuse of technology, suchas energyscreens). 
Space stations that lose power may also lose their 
repulsorgrav generators, effectively throwing the 
whole station into a zero gravity situation. 

In zero gravity, things and beings float unless 
thrust is somehow provided. On the other hand, 
once something begins moving, it doesn’t stop 
until something else stops it (such as a collision 
with a wall). The applies for vertical, horizontal 
and even twisting movement since there truly is 
no “up” or “down.” 


Planet Generation System Se). = 
ARS 


Planetary Weather 


Meteorology is one of the most difficult of the 
sciences to understand, simply because there are 
so many factors involved in determining the weather 
of a planet. Weather is defined as any type of wind 
or precipitation, whether it be in the form of rain, 
sleet, ice, ice shards, or something even more 


exotic. 

In general, weather fronts are created by the 
spin of the planet and the mixture of different 
temperature air masses (such as when cool air 
from a great water body collides with warm air 
from the interior of a continent). Weather can be 
amplified by the presence of satellites, an unusual 
planetary orbit (suchas elliptical), local geographic 


conditions (there tends to be more rain when a 
weather front hits a mountain chain, since the 
clouds must lose moisture in order to rise above 
them) and the effects of galactic civilization (cli- 
mate control is used on many advanced planets). 

Precipitation might be measured in centimeters 
per year, or even meters per day, depending upon 
the amount of moisture in the air and climate. The 
strength of winds might be barely noticeable, or so 
strong that buildings must be securely anchored or 
they will be blown over. 

The scope of this work doesn't allow for detailed 
weather mechanics, but with all of the options avail- 
able to gamemasters, the sky’s the limit. 


Characters in zero gravity can float up to five 
meters per round and have no control over direc- 
tion unless they have something to push off 
against, in which case they float 10 meters. In- 
crease the difficulty of all Dexterity or Strength 
checks by 2 (excluding checks to resist damage). 
Combined actions are not possible. Characters 
attempting full dodges will smash into any object 
in their path (taking 3D stun damage). Each com- 
bat dodge counts as two actions. Characters will 
beable to control their direction of flight by firing 
blasters or projectile weapons as a means of 
propulsion, but this requires a Moderate Me- 
chanical roll to control direction. Similary, char- 
acters who fire weapons in combat will be pushed 
away unless they are braced against a wall. 


2-4: Light 

Planets with light gravity allow characters to lift 
heavier objects, but also throws off physical coor- 
dination. They also allow easier movement. There 
are few inhabited planets with light gravity. 

Characters and creatures may take one speed 
action “free,” counting it as walking movement. 
Other speed actions reduce die codes as ex- 
plained in The Star Wars Rules Companion. In very 
light gravities, the gamemaster may want to use 
the following optional modifiers: +1D bonus to all 
Strength actions (except for resisting damage); 
-1D penalty for all Dexterity actions. 

Optional Modifiers: +2 Atmosphere 


5-11: Standard 

Standard gravity is that which is most common 
on Imperial worlds, and therefore most comfort- 
able for most races. Standard gravity includes 
several gradients of true gravitational pull, but is 
placed within this convenient grouping. 


12: Heavy 


Heavy gravity planets have a much stronger 
pull than normal, the effects of which can be 


merely inconvenient or crippling. Planets with 
very heavy gravity may make a person’s body so 
heavy that they cannot move. There are few 
planets with heavy gravity, and most of them are 
just. barely beyond the Standard gravity classifi- 
cation. On these “barely heavy” gravity planets, 
even walking counts as a speed action (it is not 
“free movement”). 

Gamemasters can use the following optional 
modifiers for slightly heavier gravity planets:-1D 
to all Strength and Dexterity actions (except for 
resisting damage). Characters must makea mini- 
mum of a Moderate stamina check after every 
minute of heavy exertion, although checks may 
be made more difficult or frequent at the 
gamemaster’s discretion. Characters who fail 
these stamina checks must rest for double the 
amount of time they were active or suffer a -3D 
penalty to all actions except resisting damage in 
combat. Additionally, when the character suffers 
damage from collisions or falling, increase the 
damage by a minimum of 1D. 

Optional Modifiers: +2 Atmosphere 


Atmosphere 


Most stellar bodies of significant size have 
atmospheres (some planets have had their atmo- 
spheres ripped away by a near pass with a rogue 
planet or some similar cataclysm). Gas giant 
atmospheres are often composed of methane, 
ammonia, and various hydrocarbons (Type IV), 
although a very small number of gas giants have 
been discovered with a breathable atmosphere 
within a limited biozone (Bespin being the prime 
example). Imperial bureaucrats use a very simple 
classification system for atmospheres. Most ship 
sensors can determine the type of atmosphere 
with sensors. However, sensors are not perfect, 
and may miss trace elements that can be harmful 
to the ship’s inhabitants, so the results of a 
sensor scan should never be taken at face value. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


— T AR Planet Generation System 


-WA 


To randomly determine a planet’s atmosphere, 
roll 2D and check the result below. 


None 


This planet has no appreciable atmosphere 
and a space suit is required simply to survive on 
the world. Planets without an atmosphere typi- 
cally have much greater temperature variations 
because thereis no atmosphere to disperse solar 
energy (on the sun side) or retain heat (on the 
night side). Characters exposed to the vacuum of 
space suffer 4D damage the first round of expo- 
sure, and increase the damage by +2D for each 
additional round in the vacuum. 


2-9: Type I (Breathable) 


A Type I atmosphere has a proper mixture of 
oxygen, nitrogen and other gases so that humans 
and comparable races can breath it unassisted. 
These atmospheres may have contaminants that 
over the long term have a detrimental effect. 

Planets with a Type l atmosphere will have life 
or at least had life recently. 


10: Type Il (Breath Mask Suggested) 


Type Il atmospheres can support life without 
use of a breath mask, but either due to too much 
or too little atmospheric pressure or oxygen, or 
unusual gases or contaminants, it is recom- 
mended that a breath mask be worn. Without a 
breath mask, detrimental effects, such as slowed 
reactions, reduced brain activity, poisoning, ora 
myriad of other effects can begin to occur within 
just a few hours of exposure. Many alien races 
can comfortably breathe Type II atmospheres 
without having to resort to breath masks. 

Planets with a Type Il atmosphere will have life 
or at least had life recently. 


11: Type Ill (Breath Mask Required) 


Type Ill atmospheres are unbreathable with- 
out a breath mask, again due to a number of 
possible characteristics. The atmosphere could 
be highly poisonous, or simply not have enough 
oxygen to breathe. Characters without breath 
masks can begin to suffer detrimental effects 
immediately. A small number of alien races (and 
certainly native creatures) will be able to breath 
these atmospheres unaided. 

Type Ill atmosphere planets frequently sup- 
port life. 


12: Type IV (Environment Suit Required) 


Type IV atmospheres are not only poisonous, 
but they are so reactive that they will cause 
injury to persons who are exposed to it. Environ- 
ment suits, space suits or life-support equipment 
is required to venture through the atmosphere, 
or characters will suffer burns and other griev- 
ous injuries. If the planet is Frigid, a thermal suit 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


may be necessary. These atmospheres may also 
be flammable or highly explosive. The gamemas- 
ter must customize the effects of the hostile 
atmosphere. 


Hydrosphere 


The hydrosphere represents the amount of 
moisture on or near the surface of the planet. 
Water is not necessarily the only liquid that can 
be found. The water may have a high concentra- 
tion of another substance that makes it unfit for 
consumption, or the liquid might merely be wa- 
ter-based, but have other components that make 
it a different compound. More exotic options 
include huge lava lakes (on planets with plenty of 
geologic activity), or deadly ammonia seas (on 
extremely cold planets). Roll 2D. 

2: Arid 

The planet is 85-100 percent covered by land. 
The planet has very little or no standing liquid, 
and there probably is very little moisture in the 
atmosphere. There may be large lakes and seas, 


but there are no great oceans, Much of the planet 
will probably be desert. 


3-4: Dry 

The planet is 50-84 percent covered by land. 
The planet has some standing liquid, and the 
land is probably a mixture of desert, dry plains, 
tundra, or other terrain types not requiring a 
great deal of water. 


5-9: Moderate 

The planet is 15-49 percent covered by land. 
The planet has large oceans and probably a well 
developed river network, especially if the planet 
has large hills and mountains. There are prob- 
ably many different terrain types. 


10-11: Moist 

The planet is only 5-14 percent covered by 
land. Most of the planet is covered by water or 
another liquid, and the few land masses that do 
exist are wet. Bogs and swamps are common. 


12: Saturated 

The planet is only 04 percent covered by land. 
Land only takes the form of islands, which may 
again be bogs, or swamps. Oceans dominate the 
terrain. 


Length of Day 


The Length of Day for most terrestrial planets 
not subjected to tide lock or another extreme 
condition is in the range of 18 to 36 standard 
hours. Even though tide-locked planets do not 
have days, it is useful to determine what a likely 
day length would beso that the length of the local 


year can be determined. To determine this total, 
roll 1D: 


s If the result is 1-2, roll 2D and add it to 10 fora 
total number of hours. 


¢ If the result is 3-4, roll 1D and add it to 20 fora 
total number of hours. 


e Ifthe resultis 5, roll 1D and add it to 25 for a total 
number of hours. 


e Ifthe result is 6, roll 1D and add it to 30 for a total 
number of hours. 


Satellite planets may have days several dozen 
hours long (as longas it takes the satellite to orbit 
the gas giant). The local year depends upon the 
orbit of the gas giant and may be several Stan- 
dard Years long. 


Length of Year 


A simple die roll will generate a suitable total 
since so many different factors are responsible 
for the determining the orbital radius and speed 
of the planet. The total can be increased or 
decreased by a few days to make the total unique 
compared to other planets. 

To determine this total, roll 2D of different col- 
ors. Read the results below and the total of the two 
numbers equals the length of year in local days: 
First Die 

Multiply the number x15 
Second Die 
75 local days 
150 local days 
3-4 225 local days 

5 
6 


Nore 


300 local days 
375 local days 


Sentient Races 


The gamemaster should determine what alien 
races are on the planet in large quantities. Hu- 
mans are among the most diverse races in the 
galaxy and can be found almost everywhere, but 
other races such as Devaronians, Duros, 
Gamorreans, Ithorians, Rodians, Sullustans, and 
Twi'leks are also known to colonize and reside on 
many different planets. If the planet is similar to 
a race’s preferred climate, or there is plenty of 
work to be found, other races may be encoun- 
tered as well. The planet may have a native 
sentient race, designated by an (N) on this line of 
the planet log. 

Gamemasters must take a few moments to de- 
sign the native sentient race, bearing in mind the 
kind of environment the race evolved in. He should 
decide their biology, culture, history, how galactic 
civilization changed their society, what common 
occupations they have and what their personali- 
ties are like. Ifthe gamemaster is going to allow the 


Planet Generation System A A fA fc 


ARS 


alien race to be used by players for characters, 
their attribute adds should equal 12D. 


Starport 


The Imperial Space Ministry has five different 
classifications for starports. For random deter- 
mination of the starport, roll 2D and find the 
result on the chart below. 


2: Landing Field 

There may be a flat space on the ground for 
ships to land. There is no control tower (there 
may not even be other starships on the planet). 
Fueling and repair services are probably unavail- 
able at any price. 


3-5: Limited Services 

This is typically a simple landing field, but 
there is at least a control tower to prevent colli- 
sions between ships in the planet’s airspace. 
There may be maintenance sheds for rent. There 
may be fuel for sale, but other important supplies 
are unavailable. 


6-8: Standard Class 


The starport is fully-staffed and equipped. 
Restocking services are available, and there is a 
small shipyard for minor repairs and modifica- 
tions. Prices for repairs and modifications can be 
up to double normal prices, and take twice as 
long to accomplish. 


9-11: Stellar Class 


This type of starport can dock and service al- 
most any class of ship. There are probably several 
shipyards in the immediate area, and they can 
handle major repairs and modifications. There is 
almost always an Imperial Customs office on site. 


12: Imperial Class 


Modern and luxurious ports with complete 
storage and maintenance facilities, and a large 
number of landing fields and docks. A complete 
menu of services and luxuries are available for 
the ship and its crew. Important merchants have 
offices at the starport. The shipyards are capable 
of rapid repairs and modifications. The Imperial 
Customs office is well staffed. 


For more information on starports, see Galaxy 
Guide 6: Tramp Freighters. 


Population 


This figure represents the total sentient popu- 
lation on a particular planet. For random deter- 
mination, roll 1D and use the chart below. 


l Population is 1-999 
2-3 Population is in the thousands 
4-5 Population is in the millions 

6 Population is in the billions 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Once the basic range is established, roll 1D to 
determine whether the population is in single 
numbers, tens or hundreds for that category. 


‘12 Population is in singles (1-9) 
3-4 Population is in tens (10-90) 
5-6 Population is in hundreds (100-900) 


To determine the exact number, roll 1D to 
determine if the number is 1-5 or 6-9. It is recom- 
mended that the population only be determined 
for two significant figures (i.e., only roll the first 
two numbers). 


1-3 Numberis between 1-5 (roll 1D, ignoring 6) 
4-6 Number is between 6-9 (Roll 1D, 
ignoring 5 and 6, and add five) 


It is recommended that the gamemaster not 
allow populations over 100 billion. Any population 
over 10 billion is very likely to be an Urban terrain 
planet, with aStandard class or better Starport and 
an Industrial level or higher Tech Level. 


Example: The gamemaster wants to ran- 
domly determine the population ofa planet. 
He rolls 1D getting a result of ‘3’ (the popu- 
lation will be in the thousands). 

Asecond die roll yields a result of ‘5’ (the 
population is inthe hundreds of thousands). 

To determine the exact number, the 
gamemaster must first roll the first signifi- 
cant figure. A roll of ‘1’ tells him the number 
is between 1 and 5, and a second roll of ‘3’ 
tells him the first number is 3, for a first 
number of 300,000. 

To determine the second significant fig- 
ure, a roll of ‘5’ tells him the number is 
between 6and 10. To get the specific number, 
he rolls 1D and adds five, ignoring a5 or 6. He 
rolls a ‘1’, and by adding 5, gets a total of 6. 

This makes the planet’s population 360,000. 


Tech Level 


The level of technological achievement is im- 
portant in determining what goods the planet 
can manufacture, as well as what they are likely 
to be interested in purchasing. Few planets fit 
directly into one of these classifications. 

This classification system, utilized by Imperial 
bureaucrats, represents the typical level of tech- 
nology to be found on the planet, but there may be 
areas where indivduals have developed or some- 
how acquired more advanced technology. Planets 
with no sentient inhabitants are considered Stone 
level by default. Roll 2D. 


2: Stone 

Stone level civilizations have loosely-knit cul- 
tures and the basic social unit is likely to be the 
tribe. The society makes and uses stone tools 
and may have developed primitive agriculture. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


A 


r 


vdire VA 


Wees tA 
pi a DAM Ny, 


i 


ant 


These people do not understand the concept of 
money, so trade will be by barter. There is no 
transportation network. 


3: Feudal 


Feudal planets have a more complex social 
structure and have begun to produce primitive 
manufactured goods. They have learned primi- 
tive mining and ore-processing techniques. Trans- 
portation is normally by ship or caravan. 


4: Industrial 


Industrial planets are beginning to understand 
mass production, and have established more 
complex political and social structures. Wind- 
mills, waterwheels, wood or coal furnaces will be 
used to generate energy. These planets typically 
want to acquire knowledge to help improve their 
technology. Motorized transportation, projec- 
tile weapons and the beginnings of mass commu- 
nication are common. 


5: Atomic 


Atomic planets have advanced, large-scale pro-: 
duction of goods. They will be very interested in 
new technologies. More advanced alloys and 
plastics become available. Space travel is in its 
infancy. Established industries, such as trans- 
portation, communications, medicine, and busi- 
ness, quickly progress and grow. 


6-7: Information 


Sophisticated communications, such as com- 
puters and satellites, become readily available. 
Industry becomes more efficient, mechanization 
is very common, and the precursors of Droids 
appear. Energy weapons are beginning to be 


Planet Generation System 


— STA Ne nent AE 
-WA 


discovered, in-system space travel is common 
and colony ships to other planets are a distinct 
possibility. Repulsorlift may be developed. Natu- 
ral resources may become scarce. 


8-12: Space 

This is the stage of most planets within galactic 
civilization, and is characterized by hyper-space 
travel, Droids, blasters, and highly efficient indus- 
try. Planets at this level are often integrated into 
the galactic economy, and produce many goods 
for export, but also import many goods. 


For more information, see Galaxy Guide 6: 
Tramp Freighters. 


Major Imports and Exports 


This should be chosen by the gamemaster 
only after considering the Government, Tech 
Level and Planet Function as a whole. The game- 
master must decide what the planet produces for 
its Own consumption, what it ships to other 


Planet Generation System DGD Wy Ht Aes 


ARS 


planets and what it must purchase from other 
planets. The whole galactic economy is built 
upon the fact that most planets specialize in 
producing certain goods and must import goods 
from other planets for survival. 

Imperial bureaucrats group goods within eight 
general categories. Within these categories, plan- 
ets may export or import only a few products. 
The categories are: Low, Mid, or High Technol- 
ogy, Metals, Minerals, Luxury Goods, Foodstuffs 
and Medicinal Goods. For more information see 
page 16 of Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp Freighters. 


System/Star Name 


Generally, the system and the star are named 
after the most important planet of the system. 


Star Type 


The gamemaster should determine the type of 
star for the system. White, yellow-white, yellow, 
orange, and red stars could conceivably support 
habitable planets (yellow and orange are most 
likely). White dwarfs (which were once red gi- 
ants) may have once supported habitable plan- 
ets, but they were burned when the star became 
a red giant. Binary stars can support habitable 
planets, and although rare, this is notimpossible, 
as Tatooine shows. This is possible if the stars 
are close enough to each other so that the planet 
orbits both stars, or the stars are so far apart that 
the planet can orbit around only one of the stars 
(this will almost always be the case). Trinary 
stars could also support habitable planets, but 
this is even less likely. 


Other Planets 


The gamemaster, at his option, can elect to 
detail the rest of the system. This is a matter of 
choosing the types of planets and their names, 
and provided you don’t start explaining the de- 
tailed astrophysics of the system, odds are likely 
no one will complain. 

In general, terrestrial planets will occupy the 
inner orbits of the system. Next will be the gas 
giants, possibly followed by frozen rock planets. 

Gas giants will be the only planets capable of 
supporting habitable satellites. Most satellites for 
terrestrial planets will be little more than hunks of 
frozen rock and ice, although they could be a large 
“companion” satellite. 


Designing Lifeforms 


One of the final steps in designing a planet is 
deciding the lifeforms that inhabit it. However, 
for game purposes the gamemaster will never 
need to completely define the biosphere. 

When designing lifeforms, it is most important 
to remember the relationship the lifeform will 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


— T AR aiet Generation System 


-WA 


have with other organisms in its environment. 
The following general concepts should help you 
develop interesting and unusual lifeforms. 


Life 

Animals are life forms that must secure food 
already organized into organic (carbon-based) 
substances. In other words, they generally cannot 
derive their sustenance from sunlight or soil, but 
rather must hunt down plants and other animals. 

Plants are lifeforms that manufacture their 
own food from inorganic substances. Often they 
draw energy from sunlight and nutrients from 
soil; in nutrient poor environments they may 
consume other plants and animals. 

Bacteria are single-celled life forms. They can 
be both useful and harmful to other life forms. 

Viruses are pure genetic material wrapped ina 
protein coating. When a virus is introduced to a 
new life form, it replaces the host’s genetic mate- 
rial and starts replicating itself, spreading 
throughout the host. 


Relationships 


Commensal relationships are ones in which 
one organism coexists with another. The first 
organism derives some benefit from its coexist- 
ence, while the second organism is neither 
harmed nor benefits from the relationship. 

Parasitic relationships are ones in which one 
organism coexists with another. The first organ- 
ism derives some benefit from the relationship, 
while the second organism is harmed, but not 
killed, by the relationship. 

Predator relationships are ones where the first 
organism benefits from the second organism, 
but also kills it, meaning that the predator must 
continually hunt down new forms of prey. 

Symbiotic relationships are ones in which two 
organisms coexist, and both of them benefit from 
their association with the other organism. 


Intelligence 


Non-intelligent organisms are controlled by 
their genetic code and the nature of their envi- 
ronment. They are merely reactive. 

Physical reflex organisms respond to external 
stimuli in variable ways. This is not a cognitive 


process, however, but a pattern of innate and 
learned response to external stimuli. For example, 
these creatures back away from hot objects after 
they are burned. They cannot learn in advance 
that “hot is bad,” for example. 

Emotional reflex organisms can feel content, 
sad, and other emotions on a rudimentary level. 
They do not literally think “I am sad,” but instead 
respond with behavior modification when things 
are going well or poorly. These creatures can 
challenge for a mate, battle for territory, “feel” 
hungry, or get angry when they haven't eaten. 

Associative thought organisms can associate 
one occurrence or action with another one. This 
allows for learned behaviors. For example, a hun- 
gry animal can chose to wait to hunt until nightfall 
because it has learned to associate nightfall with 
better chances of success when hunting. These 
creatures can feel loyalty, hurt, angry, loss, re- 
morse, or happiness to the same levels as more 
intelligent creatures, but cannot grasp ephemeral 
ideas like love and war. There is no “good versus 
evil” for such creatures; they only understand 
“beneficial to me” and “harmful to me.” 

Sentient organisms are the highest state of intel- 
ligence known in the Star Wars galaxy. The organ- 
ism has the ability to imagine, dream, divine the 
consequences of events based on past experi- 
ences and gauge the probability of future success 
given previously acquired knowledge. Emotions 
can be tempered, instilled, altered. The culture of 
such beings can define things like good and evil in 
esoteric ways. These creatures can invent new 
things, create and test theories, or develop artifi- 
cial worlds with no basis in real experience. True 
sentience is a rare development. 


The Details 


Within this framework, virtually every social 
relationship between any form of life can be de- 
fined. Once the situations are defined, the game- 
master can define how the lifeform moves, any 
unusual attacks or defenses, the lifeform’s social 
structure and needs, and other factors. 

For more information onthe nature of lifeforms, 


see pages 81 and 82 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying - 


Game, and pages 3 and 4 of Galaxy Guide 4; Alien 
Races. 


Planet Log Terrain Key 


Plains 


Forest TS Bis 
Jungle/Rain Forest ™%~ Mountains 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Barren Rock 


© Craters 


fies] Water 


ġe? Plateau e City 


A Volcano 


aD Canyon 


= Ice o Site of Interest 


+ Spaceport 


19 


System Summary 


The Baralou system has much to offer, yet it is 
still a backwater world due to its distance from 
major trade routes. There is no permanent Impe- 
rial presence in the system. A few free-traders 
have profited handsomely from their visits to 
this world. The Alliance views the Baralou sys- 
tem as an important source of food because of 
the large algae harvesting and processing facil- 
ity, Aqualis Base. 

Baralou’s four orbiting moons create dramatic 
tides and storm fronts, causing constant flooding 
of the islands. Another problem is the toxicity of 
the terrestrial plant life — most fruits and veg- 
etables have traces of a potent poison. In game 
terms, if a character (Human or alien) has five 
servings of Baralou vegetables or fruits within 
three local days, he must make an Easy stamina 
check or suffer 2D+2 damage. For each additional 
serving, check again and increase the damage by 
1D. If the character can go three days without 
eating any native plants, his system will have a 
chance to recuperate from the poison. Creatures 
from this planet can metabolize the toxin, so 
meat is not dangerous to consume. 


Tropical Islands 


The islands of Baralou support a variety of life 
forms even though they are constantly assaulted 
by storms (tides sometimes rise over 50 meters). 

The island beaches are a mixture of items 
washed up from the oceans — soil, sand, rocks 
and shells. Further inland, and farther away from 
the most devastating tides, low bushes and trees 
can be found. Because of the violent changes in 
conditions, plants on Baralou have very deep 
root systems. As a defense mechanism, most of 
the plants secrete some kind of toxin. Most of the 
plants grow year round. 

Many kinds of animals are on the islands, 
including plants, insects, amphibians, birds, rep- 
tiles and mammals. Most have some kind of 
adaptation to survive the flooding and storms, 
including gills, the ability to go into hibernation 
when submerged in water, or flight capability. 


A Planet of Riches 


The plentiful gemstones of Baralou — sasho 
gems, kuggerags, rubies, diamonds, jasse hearts — 
are formed as a result of the tremendous internal 
pressures of the planet and can be found on nearly 
every island. The native Multopos are perfectly 
willing to let freetraders gather as many gems as 


they wish as long as there is a “fair exchange” of 
merchandise. Due to their ignorance of the true 
worth of these gemstones, they are willing to trade 
a one-kilogram sasho gem (with an open market 
value of 5000 credits) for a blaster pistol and a few 
power packs. Fortunately for the Multopos and the 
Alliance algae plant, the traders have been very 
tight-lipped regarding the source of the gems. If 
less scrupulous traders and businesses were to 
ever learn Baralou’s location, amore brutal form of 
exploitation would be sure to arrive on the world. 


Majestic and Dangerous Oceans 


The oceans of Baralou aren’t nearly as turbu- 
lent as the surface. While currents are strong, the 
storms and tidal waves have little traumatic ef- 
fect more than 40 meters below the surface of the 
water. Characters caught near the surface when 
a tidal wave passes will be in for an unpleasant 
ride, as they feel themselves dragged in a million 
directions at once, only to be thrown into the air, 
high above the ocean surface. 

Many primitive aquatic plants thrive beneath 
Baralou’s waters, including bestrum algae (which 
Aqualis Base processes into food) and aquatic 
grasses. Plankton is plentiful, providing ample 
food for the fish, mollusks and crustaceans. 

The undersea scenery is truly spectacular, 
with brightly colored fish everywhere. Many of 
the fish species have evolved specialized de- 
fenses and attacks, such as razor-sharp teeth, 
venoms, poisons or color-changing camouflage. 

The sentient Krikthasi are a constant danger. 
They are just as likely to attack as communicate 
and will take whatever action is necessary to 
secure blasters. For all of their hostility and 
ferocity, the Krikthasi are also useful in warning 
that a tidal wave is approaching — if the charac- 
ters see a patrol suddenly dive toward the ocean 
floor, it is a good idea to follow suit. 


Treppok 


DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 6D 
Orneriness: 4D 

Speed Code: 6D 

Size: up to 30 meters long 
Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Teeth: 8D damage. Ifthe result is wounded 
or worse, the character must make a 
Moderate unarmed combat or Dexter- 
ity check to avoid being swallowed. 


20 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


PLANET 


Planet Type 
Tropical Ocean 


Planet Name 
Baralou 
Type: Terrestrial 
Temperature: Hot 
Atmosphere: Type | 
Hydrosphere: Saturated 
Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Ocean, jungle islands, barren rock islands 
Length of Day: 22 Hours 
Length of Year: 295 Local Days 
Sentient Races: Humans, Krikthasi (N), Multopos (N) 
Points of Interest: Aqualis Base, Magl’Ikkan Temple, 
Krikthasi territories: Undrarian, Reterri and Winsallu 
Starport: Limited Services (Aqualis Base) 
Population: 500,000 (surface), 5 million (aquatic) 
Government: Multopos — solitary tribes, Krikthasi — 


feudal or solitary tribes 
Tech Level: Stone 
Major Exports: Foodstuffs (bestrum algae, fish), luxury 
goods (tropical fish, Krikthasi crafts, gemstones) 
Major Imports: None 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Baralou 


Star Name: Baralou Star Type: Yellow 


ORBITAL BODIES 


[Name | Planet Type | Moons, 
fBaralou | Tropical Ocen | a| 
[Mou Bet | AsteroidBet | o| 
| Masalou | BarrenRock | 0 | 
Saturated EA 
[Tanaou | FrozenRox | o | 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


o—) 
e , 
‘ 


z 
\- Winsallu 
a 


©- 68 


z „> Krikthasi 
‘’ Territories 


World Summary 


The water-rich Baralou system offers mineral 
wealth, abundant natural resources and vast trade 
potential for those who happen upon it. 

The most remarkable planet, Baralou, occupies 
the first orbital slot about the yellow star. The world 
is covered by oceans, with several chains of volcanic 
islands protruding from the waters. It is a tropical 
world, with temperatures ranging from 20 to 40 de- 
grees Celsius. Most of the islands, now stable, are 
covered by tropical jungle. The orbiting moons help 
generate the violent storms and tremendous tides 
that constantly sweep the world. 

The Multopos, one of two intelligent races native 
to Baralou, are found throughout the islands. These 
creatures are currently engaged in a fierce battle for 
survival with the marine Krikthasi. Both races have 
developed stone level technology. Trade with the 
Multopos and Krikthasi is by barter only. 

This world is visited by many independent trad- 
ers, and is also the location for an important Alliance 
algae processing complex. 


21 


Stephen Crane 


ARS 


(Ue) =Ý | = 
Se ee 


Undersea Action 


When fights occur underwater, keep the following tac- 
tics and tips in mind: 


e Lightsabers don’t work well under water. They boil up 
the ocean and spin around, requiring a Moderate Dexterity 
roll to hold onto or pick up. 


* Characters use their swimming codes for movement and 
dodging. 


+ When a grenade goes off underwater, it does 4D damage 
to everyone within its entire range. Victims at close range 
can be wounded, but all others take stun damage only. 
This is because water is tremendous conductor of concus- 
sion waves. 


e Blasters are not as effective underwater. The difficulty of 
any blaster shot is increased by one level of difficult, and 
the blaster does -2D damage. 


Combat: Treppok only fight in defense, or 
unless frightened by the Krikthasi “treppok call.” 
If the latter, they will attack anything that moves. 
They attack by attempting to bite or swallow 
whatever they can catch. 

Using Treppok In The Roleplaying Game: 
The Treppok is rarely a threat unless frightened. 


The treppok are perhaps the most spectacu- 
lar of Baralou’s undersea creatures. They are 
large, brilliant red fish, up to 30 meters long. 
Their tails have six fins, with another six fins at 
the midpoint of their bodies. They havea flexible, 
but very strong interlocked skeleton (the 
Krikthasi build homes from their skeletons). 
These solitary creatures feed on everything from 
plankton to fish. 

These creatures are peaceful, but the Krikthasi 
have learned how to manipulate them. Through 
use of what they call a “treppok call,” they are 
able to produce sounds that terrify the large 
behemoths. By positioning several Krikthasi ki- 
lometers apart, they can force a treppok to swim 
wherever they want it to go. 


Grotseth 


DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Speed Code: 2D 
Size: 34 meters long 
Scale: Character 
Attacks: 

Teeth: 4D damage. 

Razored Shells: Grotseth are covered 
with small, razor-sharp shells. They 
cause 4D damage whenever a charac- 
ter makes contact with the creature 
and fails a Moderate unarmed combat 
or Dexterity check. 


Combat: Grotseth are the most aggressive and 
dangerous fish in the oceans of Baralou. They 
hunt in packs (a normal pack has several full- 
grown adults and many pups), and they will 
attack any creature that appears weaker or 
smaller than them. 

Using Grotseth In The Roleplaying Game: 
These creatures can be a menace at any time. 
They make for an interesting distraction in the 
middle of a heated battle. 


Multopos 


The Multopos are tall, muscular amphibians 
that populate the islands of Baralou. They havea 
thick, moist skin (mottled grey to light blue in 
color), with a short, but very wide torso. They 
have muscular legs and thin, long arms. Trailing 
from the forearms and legs are thick membranes 
that aid in swimming. Each limb has three digits. 

Their heads have long snouts, with three sets 
of gills immediately below the lower jaw. They 
eat small herbivores and plants. Their large, 
bulbous eyes are set deeply into their skulls. 


Multopos Tribes 


The Multopos form tribes and generally reside 
toward the center, and thus the safest, portions 
of an island. They build simple structures out of 
soil and sand, which they mix with adhesive from 
certain tree trunks. The resulting buildings are 
sturdy, but very light and float in water. 

Multopos tribes are quite traditional. Indi- 
viduals stay with the tribe they were born and 
raised with. There is very little individuality in 
their society, as each Multopos is wholly dedi- 
cated to the tribe. 


Multopos 


Height: 2 meters 
DEXTERITY 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D MECHANICAL 1D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D TECHNICAL 0D 


Note: Dueto their webbed hands, Multopos 
suffer a penalty -1D when using any object 
requiring fine manipulation of controls. 

Roleplaying Hints: The Multopos are 
peaceful, agileand quickto learn. They would 
make excellent aquatic spies for the Alliance. 
When removed from an aquatic environment 
for over one day, they must make a Moderate 
stamina check. If the check is failed, they 
suffer dehydration damage equal to 1D for 
each day spent away from water. 

Quote: “Help us defend children! Let we 
use blasters to stop krikthasi! Fight in friend- 
ship.” 


STRENGTH 2D 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


ome FAA 
-WA 


Multopos 


There is little for these creatures beyond sur- 
vival. They spend a great deal of time caring for the 
young (who cannot leave the water until they are 
about six local years old). If not caring for young, 
the Multopos spend their time hunting or gather- 
ing plants. The tribes are loosely organized; the 
Multopos normally follow the lead of the tribe 
member showing the most initiative. 

Multopos tribes are isolated from one another, 
although the race as a whole seems to be curious 
and peaceful. It is only with the Krikthasi that the 
Multopos see no potential for peace. 

The most important function of the tribe is to 
raise more Multopos. Because of their amphibious 
nature, Multopos can only mate in water, and their 
eggs must be kept in water for the entire develop- 
ment period. This wouldn’t be a problem except 
for the Krikthasi, who steal Multopos eggs for food. 

Each Multopos tribe has several canals to 
keep the eggs alive between storms. Multopos 
eggs and infants are cared for in these canals, and 
several adults will watch the canals at all times. 

The greatest fear for a Multopos is whenastorm 
floods the island, allowing the Krikthasi to launch 
an attack. While some of the tribe members try to 
bring the eggs and infants to safety, the warriors do 
their best to fend off the Krikthasi. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


iy Se 
“SS. Krikthasi 


Ss a 
ale aa T S 


The have had many positive dealings with off- 
worlders and will be peaceful unless attacked first. 
They will approach curious visitors and attempt to 
speak with them in a pidgin version of Basic. 


Trading with the Natives 


The Multopos have quickly adapted to the 
galaxy’s technology. About the only off-world 
goods Multopos care for are advanced weapons, 
such as blasters. While generally not a warring 
people, they understand the need for a good 
defense.The traders were more than happy to 
trade blasters for precious gemstones. Some 
Multopos tribes with blasters have actively be- 
gun hunting down Krikthasi beneath the sea. 


Krikthasi 


The Krikthasi are large marine mollusks, with 
long, flexible bodies. The Krikthasi have four small 
but very well developed eyes, and two openings at 
the forepart of their bodies. They have four ten- 
tacles immediately behind the eyes. One mouth is 
used for eating, while the other intake forces water 
into the Krikthasi’s body. The water is forced 
through a series of muscles, and expelled through 
agroup of vents at the rear of the body, allowing the 
creature to propel itself at speeds of up to 40 
kilometers per hour. The other end of the bodyalso 


has four tentacles, as well as several pairs of dorsal 
fins (the exact number varies depending upon 
ancestry). 

The creatures are highly intelligent. Their 
“natural” coloration ranges from black to brown, 
but they have chromanins that allow them to 
communicate by changing color. Not onlyis color 
important, but the location, speed, pattern and 
fluctuation of color allows them to express very 
complex concepts and emotions. Imperial biolo- 
gists have yet to decipher their language, but 
they believe that blue and shades of green repre- 
sent aggression, yellow represents territory and 
red or orange indicates a willingness to discuss 
or negotiate. 


Krikthasi Society 


The Krikthasi are an aggressive, violent and 
territorial race. Their society is very fragmented, 


AR— 
ARS™ 


with several large and powerful fiefdoms control- 
ling the majority of the ocean. Each fiefdom, called 
a junieuw, is ruled by an osi, normally the most 
powerful warrior of the territory. The osi’s family 
controls portions of the territory, directing indi- 
vidual tribes. There are also many independent 
tribes scattered around the oceans of Baralou. 

Many times the osis will declare a war in an 
attempt to capture new hunting territories (the 
Krikthasi are carnivorous and rely upon schools 
of fish for food). Border skirmishes are also very 
common. 

The ongoing war with the Multopos has helped 
the Krikthasi develop their society into its struc- 
tured and regimented state. Part of the war comes 
from misunderstanding —the Krikthasicaninno 
way understand that the Multopos could be intel- 
ligent — and partially from a bloodlust that is 
seldom sated. They also consider multopos eggs 
a delicious delicacy. 

The Krikthasi use the interlocked cartilage 
skeletons of dead treppok for homes, providing a 
very defensible residence. They carve coral and 
the bones of dead creatures for spears and primi- 
tive tools. 


The Undrarian Junieuw 


With a territory covering thousands of square 
kilometers and controlling nearly 20 individual 
tribes, the Undrarian junieuw, under the control 
of Osi Hass, is one of the most powerful Krikthasi 
organizations on the planet. Other powerful 
junieuws, such as the Reterri and Winsallu, have 
tried repeatedly to dislodge Hass from his seat of 
power. 

Hass desperately wants to acquire the ad- 
vanced weaponry used by the Multopos, but so 
far has had little luck. His proximity to Aqualis 
Base has allowed him to develop a cozy relation- 
ship with Devvol, the chief administrator at the 
plant, and Hass has graciously allowed the plant 
to harvest within its territory in exchange for 
information on advanced technology. So far 
Devvol has given him asmall number of weapons 
(Hass has assured him that they would be used 


Krikthasi 


Length: 2.5 meters 
DEXTERITY 3D+2 
Swimming 8D 
PERCEPTION 2D 


STRENGTH 2D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D+2 
TECHNICAL +1 


KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 


Roleplaying Hints: Aggressive, violent 
and stubborn. The Krikthasi communicate 
through color. The Krikthasi also require a 
steady stream of water, taking 5D damage 
every minute they are out of water. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


J 
-WA 


only to repel grotseth attacks) and some help 
with developing super strong materials from the 
plants of the ocean. 


Aqualis Base 


Ostensibly, Aqualis Base (known as Aqualis 
Baralou Algae Processing Plant #T-18) is owned 
by the Aqualis Food Conglomerate. In reality, itis 
an Alliance food production plant. It is managed 
by Fez Devvol and has a staff of 30 full time 
workers and over 100 Droids. The workers har- 
vest the algae with sealed aquapods, while the 
Droids are primarily responsible for maintenance. 

The base has several banks of repulsorlift 
engines to lift it above fast moving storm fronts 
and tidal waves. 

Since his arrival, Devvol has developed a good 
relationship with the nearby Krikthasi tribes; he 
has no reason to bother with the Multopos, and 
is unconcerned regarding the two species’ ongo- 
ing war. He also has no qualms about trading 
weapons for information, gems or assistance, 
although Rebel High Command would surely in- 
vestigate his actions if it ever found out what was 
happening. 

An independent freighter, the Sontor Skipper, 
has been contracted to pick up one load of algae 
every 23 days (Captain Ross, owner of the Skip- 
per, normally also trades several blasters for 
gemstones before leaving the planet). 


Magl'Ikkan Temple 


This Krikthasi temple is located at the base of 
alarge undersea mountain. Itis controlled by the 
Undrarian junieuw, and is used for ritual com- 
bats and important feasts. The base of the temple 
is built from carved and flattened sheets of 
treppok bone, with many sculptures of coral. The 
floor is dyed many different colors. 

The temple is constantly patrolled by at least 
four warriors. Any visitors who approach the 
temple will be attacked. The Krikthasi will fight to 
the death to protect the temple. If a celebration 
is underway, the warriors will fight amongst them- 
selves for the right to attack the “invaders.” 


Adventure Idea 


The characters, in the role of free-traders, 
arrive on Baralou as a major tidal wave strikes a 
Multopos tribe. During the ensuing battle with 
Krikthasi raiders, they are impressed by the val- 
iant but ultimately losing efforts of the Multopos. 
The Multopos offer to give their gems to the 
traders if they will only rescue and return their 
captured eggs. 


NN nse 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


BARALOU DIAGRAM 
Aqualis Base 


Weather Sensor Base 


Array rae Command 


gr 
NON EON EINE NT TE PALS aoe 


ans aa 


ns 
BAe 


Vere PRR 


Feeder 


Landing Chutes 


Platform 


Repulsor 
Units 


Storage 

Units i 
Algae 

Processing 


- Aquapod 
Unit Bay 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are sent to Aqualis Base for a 
minor mission and are introduced to the Krikthasi 
by Devwvol. During the meeting, Devvol will supply 
some weapons tothe Krikthasi. Devvol will encour- 
age the characters to make a brief stopover at a 
nearby island—one with a Multopos tribe that has 
been attacked by the Krikthasi. As the characters 
learn more about the Krikthasi’s sinister nature, 
they may be inclined to get involved. 

This situation places the characters in the 
difficult situation of either encouraging needless 
death on both sides of the conflict, or trying to 
mediate what appears to bea hopeless situation. 


Baralou 


John Paul Lona 


A World of Contrasts 


Celanon has two prime businesses: trade (re- 
stricted to Celanon City) and agriculture (to be 
found everywhere else). A generally temperate 
world, the huge clan-run farms of the Nalroni cover 
the continents, producing grains and vegetables 
for export to hungry and wealthy planets through- 
out the sector. The world’s dominant terrain is 
rolling fields, with many sections of lush forest. 

Most visitors only see the sprawling space- 
port of Celanon City. It is the only true city on the 
planet, standing tall in the middle of simple farms. 


Celanon City 
“Celanon City — if it’s anywhere, it’s there.” 


As one of the most notorious trading cities in 
the Outer Rim Territories, Celanon City is the one 
place that everyone seems to be coming from or 
going to. A free trader is considered an amateur 
until he has cut a deal in Celanon City. It is where 
the smart learn how to survive, and the weak 
discover it’s time to start looking for a desk job. 

Celanon City is a sprawling metropolitan com- 
plex covering nearly 200 square kilometers. The 
city has extended to the property limits pro- 
scribed by the charter that established the city, 
resulting in architects designing taller buildings 
in order to meet demand for office, warehouse, 
trading and retail space. 

Over 50 million residents of every race make 
the city a microcosm of the galaxy. It is a place 
where the very wealthy mix with the very poor, 
and has a high transient population. Billions of 
metric tons of goods pass through Celanon’s 
sphere of influence every year. 

The streets of the bustling city are crowded 
around the clock. Like most other worlds, prime 
business hours are during the day, but night- 
clubs, street traders and restaurants, located in 
every corner of the city, keep the pace of life ata 
fever pitch no matter what the hour. 

The city is roughly circular and divided into 
several distinct districts, including the space- 
port, diplomatic section, spacers’ section, tran- 
sient residences, trade consortiums and guilds, 
Imperial military facilities, market district, cor- 
porate zone, and governing zone. The Nalroniare 
deeply concerned about the prospect of their 
native culture being contaminated by outsiders, 
so the outside of the city is ringed by a huge wall, 
ten meters tall. Passage to the outside is granted 
only to Nalroni or special guests under the direct 


supervision of a Nalroni, and is allowed only 
through specially designated gates. 


Spaceport 

The most prominent district of the city is the 
Spaceport Region, where all of the small freighters, 
bulk freighters, and shuttles are docked among 
thousands of bays. With the ever increasing level of 
business over the years, the spaceport buildings 
have been continuously rebuilt. Within the skeletal 
frames of the spaceport buildings are cantinas, 
spaceship repair and modification shops, small 
cargo companies and other businesses dedicated 
totheneeds of spacers. These businesses are more 
expensive than in other sections of the city, but 
they are also more convenient than travelling 
around the city. 

Since everyone who visits Celanon City must 
arrive via the spaceport, this section of the city is 
always a center of activity. In addition to the 
traffic of legitimate traders and crewmembers, 
petty criminals and smugglers comb the streets 
and alleyways of the district. The spaceport has 
all of the drawbacks of modern Imperial cities — 
overcrowding, overpriced goods, and crime. Visi- 
tors will also see a large number of Nalroni trad- 
ers, guild inspectors, and security officers, along 
with regular Imperial patrols. While the Imperi- 
als are present only to keep order, the Nalroni 
encountered in this section are ever watchful to 
make sure that the trading guilds are awarded 
their “fair percentage” for the business that is 
transacted within city boundaries. 

Celanon Spaceport Control has the unenviable 
job of making sure that the thousands of ships in 
orbit and arriving in the city are properly routed 
to avoid collisions and other incidents. The huge 
building, nearly 140 stories tall, is constantly 
abuzz with activity. In addition to traffic control, 
the planet’s customs offices are also based in the 
building. 


Diplomatic Section 


This section is dominated by modern buildings 
ofevery architectural style. Planetary governments 
and large corporates have located their headquar- 
ters inthis section ofthe city. Itis within these large 
buildings that billions of credits are traded every 
day, as worlds seek a regular supplier of Droids, 
blasters, food, computer goods or repulsor ve- 
hicles, while other planets try to sell off their goods 
at the highest price possible. This section is big 
business at its most influential. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


PLANET 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Type: Terrestrial 


: 


Major Exports: Foodstuffs, bulk trade goods 
Major Imports: Luxury goods, bulk trade goods 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Celanon 


Star Name: Nalros Star Type: Yellow World Summary 


ORBITAL BODIES Celanon is an infamous commerce world and the 
prime planet for the Celanon Spur trade route, With 
the rise of the Emperor’s New Order, the under- 
ground economy has grown to scandalous propor- 
tions. 

Celanon City is the only substantial city on the 
world, with a population of over 50 million (only 10 
million are permanent residents, including two mil- 
lion Nalroni). 

The native Nalroni regulate all trade through 
Celanon Spaceport and derive tremendous revenues 
from tariffs and bribes. The Nalroni are some of the 
most skilled negotiators and merchants in the gal- 
axy, and their merchants guilds and trading 
consortiums are extremely wealthy and influential 
throughout the sector. Just about anything can be 
bought, sold, or stolen in Celanon City. 

Outside of Celanon City, the world is dedicated to 
agriculture. The terrain consists of gentle rolling 
plains and low hills. An extensive river network feeds 
the lands of Celanon. Celanon exports many different 
grains and vegetables. 


Stephen Crane 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 27 


The sights and sounds of this section are 
overwhelming — representatives of the corpora- 
tions and planetary governments are always on 
the go and always trying to be the first, the best, 
and the most noticed. Fashion and attitude are 
taken to nearly obnoxious extremes, and there 
are constant social events for these young execu- 
tives to show off themselves. Luxury airspeeders 
are the rule, and everyone is dressed in the latest 
styles from around the galaxy. Imperial troops 
keep a vigilant eye over these sections, always 
willing to interfere on behalf of “important people” 
should disputes arise. The street-level businesses 
areaconglomeration of shops, restaurants, cloth- 
ing stores, luxury good shops and service indus- 
tries geared directly for the well-to-do. 

Characters will probably stand out in this sec- 
tion since few of them have the wealth to blend into 
the crowd and open displays of weaponry are 
considered rather rude. They are likely to be ha- 
rassed byImperial troops or Nalroni security forces. 


Spacers’ Section 


The spacers’ section is much like the space- 
port section, but it is less expensive and a good 
deal more dangerous. The open air markets fill 
every street and alleyway, offering goods of ques- 
tionable origin, from blasters to used starships. 
Other common businesses are small trade com- 
panies —they are contacted by other companies 
that need a cargo, no questions as to exactly 


a 


ARS 


what please, taken somewhere else, and soon. 
The trade company then finds a tramp freighter 
or bulk freighter to make sure that the cargo 
arrives safe and on-time, taking a healthy com- 
mission for their efforts. 

Many companies are run or owned by the 
Nalroni, so deals are seldom generous or entirely 
upfront. Characters take their chances when se- 
curing cargos, but the money is there for those 
who know how to work the companies and the 
streets. 

People looking for off-world transport, again, 
no questions asked, are known to frequent this 
section. Bounty hunters and hired guns are also 
common, and there are always strong backs 
willing to trade a few weeks labor for passage to 
other worlds. 


Transient Residences 


Celanon City has one of the most fluid popula- 
tions in the galaxy, and all of those traders need 
someplace to rest their weary bones. Covering a 
good chunk of the eastern section of the city, 
these neighborhoods tend to be overcrowded 
and expensive. While they aren’t dangerous in 
terms of street crime, these are also excellent 
places to “disappear” from sight for a little while. 
As a consequence, criminals fleeing the law, Im- 
perial draft dodgers, disgruntled corporate types 
and others with something to hide tend to end up 
in these neighborhoods. 


Money Buys Security 


Characters visiting Celanon will be treated to 
the Nalroni way of life even before landing. Visitors 
landing in the city are asked their preference of 
facilities — “economy” or “trader” docking bays. 
Anyone with any experience in the sector will know 
enough to purchase trader bays. 

A berth in an economy bay is 150 credits per 
local day (pricey by most standards), with stan- 
dard maintenance and restocking costing about 
150 percent of the cost of other spaceports (see the 
costs listed on page 30 of Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp 
Freighters for more information). Refeuling costs 
are in-line with other spaceport locations, but the 
costs of repairs and overhauls are up to five times 
as expensive as normal (and highly variable, de- 
pending upon the model of ship, the local availabil- 
ity of parts and what the mechanic thinks of you). 

The basic cost for a trader bay is 250 credits per 
local day, but maintenance and restocking is avail- 
able at the standard cost. However, trader bays 
offer something that the economy bays do not — 
security. Wealth and status can buy anything in 
Celanon, including the law, and it’s well known that 
trader bays are relatively free of unannounced 
contraband inspections. 


Upon landing in a trader bay, the owner or 
captain ofthe ship will be approached by an official 
Nalroni Trade Representative whose prime pur- 
pose is to extort bribes, er, “convince traders of the 
need to adequately prepare for the security haz- 
ards of a bustling trade city such as Celanon City.” 
In other words, for anywhere from 100 to 1,000 
credits (for a small tramp freighter, with costs 
rising proportionately for larger ships), the Trade 
Representative can assure the characters that no 
one will pay any attention to the “discrete actions 
of businessmen such as yourselves.” Fees are set 
according to the number of visits the ship has 
made to the world (the fewer the number of visits, 
the higher the cost), whether or not the ship or 
crew are known to traffic illegal goods (if yes, the 
cost is much higher) and how much the Trade 
Representative believes he can convince the cap- 
tain to pay. 

Characters with ties on Celanon will be able to 
assure themselves freedom from spot inspections 
and thefts, as well as be able to find reliable me- 
chanics who will do good work for affordable prices. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


A) 


my 
> 


Trade Consortiums and Guilds 


The trade guilds of Celanon are where the true 
wealth and authority of the planet are to be 
found. No deals are accepted, no contracts hon- 
ored, and no laws enforced or evaded, without a 
guild’s approval. This is one of the few sections 
where the native Nalroni outnumber the aliens. 

The trade guild buildings are sprawling, ornate 
complexes. Everything is garishly decorated with 
sculptures, holo-art, and treasures of every de- 
scription. Luxury airspeeders are everywhere, and 
richly dressed Nalroni merchants, with assistants 
to attend to every desire, are constantly on the go. 

Characters will seldom visit this section of the 
city unless under the guardianship of a corporate 
executive or asked to undertake a mission by the 
Nalroni (a rare privilege indeed). 


Imperial Military Facilities 
This is the most restricted section of the entire 
city. Within the confines of the five-meter tall 
walls, spaceport facilities, troop barracks, ammo 
dumps, armories and administrative buildings 
keep Governor Sykar and the Empire firmly in 
control of the city (or so the Nalroni would have 
the Empire believe). Five full army battlegroups 

are stationed within the city at all times. 


Market District 


An area dedicated to the small trader and 
merchant, the market district is where small 
quantities of goods are sold to speculators and 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


consumers. The goods can then be taken on to 
other worlds and sold at a profit. This section of 
the city is appropriate for finding illegally modi- 
fied weapons, cargos of illegal spices, inexpen- 
sive Droid replacement parts, vehicles and much 
more. Like the spacers’ section, shady and dan- 
gerous people cluster in this section looking for 
profit, no matter how it is made. Undercover 
Imperial agents are known to frequent this sec- 
tion of the city, but Alliance cells are also com- 
mon in this sector. 


Corporate Zone 


While the deals are cut in the diplomatic sec- 
tion, the rank and file workers of the corpora- 
tions are to be found in this section of the city. 
The routing of goods is handled by the corporate 
offices in this sector, as are corporate intelli- 
gence networks. Smaller corporations have their 
headquarters in this section of the city since they _ 
can't afford the diplomatic sector. The area is 
relatively safe, with a moderate Imperial pres- 
ence. Nalroni will be observing and directing 
trade everywhere, but it is an excellent section in 
which to find long-term freight contracts. 


Governing Zone 


Even the trade guilds need a bureaucracy to 
enforce their dictates. The governing zone is 
where all of the petty bureaucrats cluster, and 
where characters in trouble go to try and get out 
of trouble. 


Celanon 


CELANON DIAGRAM 
Celanon City 


Celanon 
Spaceport 
Control 


>s >< Consortiùmsi | 
© sv and.Guilds 


Of course, the Nalroni character lends itself to 
corruption and bribery. Individuals who have 
been particularly offensive are reported to some 
institution in this section, and the unfortunate 
victim has no choice but to watch the bureau- 
cracy grind away until his name has been cleared. 


The Gates 


The Nalroni carefully regulate the passage of 
individuals within sectors of the city. The gates 
are where identification cards are checked, and 
are also an added source of revenue, since each 
individual must pay a set fee of two credits each 
time they pass through a gate. The Nalroni don’t 
allow visitors to leave the city and venture to the 
countryside. Passage to the farms is only through 
the gates on the outer boundaries of the city. 


An Agricultural World 


The beautiful rolling plains and forests of 
Celanon are seldom seen by off-worlders, yet 
from this land comes grain, vegetables and meat 
to feed planets throughout the sector. 


aR 
ARS 


Merchants’ Guild 
Headquarters 


Governor Sykar's 
Mansion 


There are six main continents (Cekbar, Arradi, 
Holvi, Runnor, Jelldar and Desetur), providing 
ample living space and a wide range of climates 
(indicated on the planetary map). Weather and 
temperature on the world is seasonably varied, 
with fierce storms ocurring during seasonal 
changes. As the world has become more devel- 
oped and the amount of available forest land has 
shrunk, many animal populations have dwindled. 


Orbital Fleets 


The upper atmosphere and low orbit of Celanon 
is one of the busiest trading areas in the sector. 
All manner of bulk transports and container ves- 
sels constantly circle the world, while represen- 
tatives from the ship's company try to make a 
profitable deal. All of this takes place under the 
watchful eye of the Imperial navy and the Nalroni 
planetary patrol. Due to the inordinate amount of 
traffic around the world, visitors often have to 
wait several hours before they can be cleared for 
a flight path to the world. 


30 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


John Paul Lona 


ao FA 
-WA 


A Dangerous Doublecross 


Just as the Nalroni way of live has always been 
to keep every option open, so the Nalroni are 
playing a dangerous game in playing the Alliance 
off the Empire. The Empire believes it has the 
firm loyalty of the Nalroni, but this proud people 
actually encourages the presence of Alliance 
spies, if only to divert Imperial interest from the 
huge amount of money the Nalroni are acquiring 
from their bribes and tariffs. The Alliance re- 
gards the Nalroni as useful, but knows that they 
are not to be trusted. It is not an over-exaggera- 
tion to say that virtually everyone in the city of 
Celanon is a spy (the Nalroni call this double- 
dealing “being in the hunt”). While the Nalroni do 
hand the occasional Rebel smuggling ship or spy 
over to the Imperials (always making sure the 
blameis squarely placed on someoneelse’s shoul- 
ders), it is in their best interest to keep such 
unpleasantness to a minimum., The Nalroni aren’t 
sure which side will ultimately win the war, and 
aren’t willing to risk being wrong. 


Nalroni 


The Nalroniare golden-furred humanoids with 
long, tapered snouts and extremely sharp teeth. 
They have slender builds, and are elegant and 
graceful in motion. These clever aliens have 
turned their predatory instincts towards the art 
of trading and negotiation. They have an almost 
instinctive understanding of the psychology and 
behavior of other races, and are able to use this 
to great advantage no matter what the situation. 

The merchant guilds wield tremendous influ- 
ence over Nalroni society, and control the plan- 
etary government and strictly regulate the num- 
ber of Nalroni youngsters who are allowed to 
become merchants. There is a clear distinction 
between the urban residents of Celanon City 
(who call themselves Celanites) and the rural 
Nalroni who live in large clans and tribes. 


Nalroni 


Height: 1.75 meters 
DEXTERITY 1D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
STRENGTH 2D 


TECHNICAL 1D 

Roleplaying Hints: A Nalron is shrewd 
and cunning. They are masters of decep- 
tion, trickery, and double-dealing. 

Quote: “I’m not like other Nalroni. My 
side is your side. Trust me.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Almost all of the Celanites are merchants. A 
Celanite trader wears the richest robes.and cloth- 
ing he can afford. In their society, one’s dress is 
the most important symbol of status and station. 
Celanites are dedicated to making a large profit 
and increasing their status within their respec- 
tive trading guild. Family and tribal ties are effec- 
tively severed when a youth enters a trading 
guild. 

While the Celanites have firm control of the 
planet, they also distribute the wealth among the 
tribes. This insures their continued popularity, 
and while many rural Nalroni complain about the 
excesses of the Celanites, they are appreciative 
of theconveniences that their wealth has brought. 

The vast majority of Nalroni work on the farms 
of Celanon. Mechanization and Droid labor has 
made farming an easy occupation. 

Native Nalroni architecture is based on wood 
and grass, with natural clay pottery and earthen- 
ware for dining. With the arrival of the Empire 
and the new technology, the Nalroni now prefer 
to live in prefabricated housing units supplied by 
Imperial merchants, which they then modify and 
decorate in the old ways. 


The System 


The Saurton System has two asteroid belts, 
one inside and one outside of the orbit of its only 
planet-sized body, Essowyn, 

The asteroid belts are rich in ferrous metals, 
but the system is so far from the major trade 
routes that only six of the major mining 
consortiums can afford the cost of operations in 
the system. Because the companies are fierce 
competitors, the Empire keeps a close watch 
over all activities in this system, but allows the 
companies to vigorously protect their claims: 
virtually any ship that enters aclaimed portion of 
the asteroid belts will find itself facing a great 
deal of hostile weaponry. 

Each company has at least one space station, 
and normally several smaller bases on individual 
asteroids. Container ships visit the system on a 
regular basis, and several free traders have been 
granted permits to sell consumer goods and 
other personal wares to company employers. 
The companies and the Empire have agreed to 
restrict system access to those with sales per- 
mits, so Essowyn is visited only by free traders 
who have extra goods for sale. 

Essowyn has also been a site for new settle- 
ments as the mining companies have developed 
their interests below the scarred surface of the 
world. The native Saurton have benefitted from 
the investment of so many offworlders, and de- 
spite the grim nature of the work (and the society 
as a whole), it is a bustling world with great 
economic wealth. 


Essowyn 


Essowyn’s many islands and continents are 
covered with mountains and grasslands. Some 
forest areas can be found in the mountain areas, 
but the constant grazing of the hoska herds 
prevent any but the most meager tree and bush 
growth on the plains. The world’s entire surface 
is pockmarked with craters from the many mete- 
orites which constantly pelt the planet. Despitea 
pleasant climate and ample water, the barrage of 
debris makes the surface almost uninhabitable, 
requiring all permanent structures to be under- 
ground. 

Essowyn’s atmosphere is turbulent, due in 
large part to the temperature fluctuations caused 
by the world’s slightly erratic orbit. The four 
orbiting moons (really little more than captured 
asteroids) influence the oceanic tides, creating 
an environment prone to violent storms. These 


storms rage across the mountains and plains, 
spooking hoska herds into stampeding. Most of 
the storms form in the warmer equatorial zones 
and careen wildly across the planet, meandering 
towards the polar regions of the world, where 
they dissipate. 


Saurton Cities 


The underground Saurton cities are danger- 
ous, overcrowded and a health hazard to all but 
the Saurton. Most cities were established thou- 
sands of years ago, and grew out of deep warrens 
that had existed for many more centuries before 
then. Huge, multi-layered tunnels are hollowed 
out of the ground, with massive support beams. 
Individual rooms and groups of rooms are also 
hollowed out of the ground. Massive air ducts 
and water shafts bring fresh air and moisture 
down into the cities, and each city has a series of 
connecting tunnels the reach to the surface. 
Most of the cities are a minimum of 100 meters 
deep, and are far enough from the surface to 
sustain only minimal damage from meteorite 
impacts. With the advent of starship travel, many 
cities have constructed expansion shafts large 
enough to accommodate freighters and shuttles, 
although the majority of visiting ships head to 
the corporate complexes. 

These cities are breeding grounds for many 
dangerous strains of bacteria because of the 
squalor and filth that the Saurton are willing to 
live in. While the bacteria present no threat to the 
Saurton, Humans and aliens must be extremely 
careful in these cities lest they contract a conta- 
gious disease (most corporate complexes have 
decontamination booths which everyone must 
enter when they return to the complex). 

Visitors to the cities will feel the tension of the 
imminent political showdown the Saurton people 
are headed toward. Traders do everything in 
their power to avoid travelling to the cities, in- 
stead preferring to deal with Saurton only at 
mining facilities. 


War on the Horizon 


Because of the high population density and the 
warlike tendencies of the Saurton, there has arisen 
a seemingly irreconcilable conflict between two 
groups of people: the Quenno (back-to-tradition) 
and the Des’mar (forward-looking). The planet is 
on the brink of Civil War. 

The Quenno have long sought to return 
Essowyn to the Saurton, and forcibly remove the 
mining corporations. Since most of the wealth 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


ee i A ea. 
OEE 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Essowyn Cratered Plains 
Type: Terrestrial 


Atmosphere: Type | 

Hyrdosphere: Dry 

Gravity: Standard 

Terrain: Cratered plains, cratered low hills 


Length of Day: 39 Hours 


Starport: Standard Class 

Population: 80 million 

Government: Elitist Council 

Tech Level: Feudal 

Major Exports: Metals, minerals, foodstuffs 

Major Imports: foodstuffs, high technology, medicinal 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Saurton 


Star Name: Saurton Star Type: Yellow 
ORBITAL BODIES 


[Name | Planet Type 
Asteroid Belt 

Cratered Plains 

Greawyn Belt 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


avid 


World Summary 


The Saurton system is remarkable for its twin 
asteroid belts, rich with minerals and metals, and its 
lone world, Essowyn. 

Several large mining corporations have facilities 
located in and near the asteroid belts. The compa- 
nies are very protective of their claims, and unautho- 
rized travel into the belts is strongly discouraged, 
although many free traders visit the mining installa- 
tions to sell their wares to the miners and their 
families. 

Sandwiched between these two belts is Essowyn, a 
valuable but battered worldthat is hometotheSaurton, 
a sturdy race of hunters and miners. The world has 
become a base of operations for many mining compa- 
nies, exporting metals and minerals to manufacturing 
systems throughout the Trax Sector. The world is 
constantly pelted by the debris of the asteroid belts. 
The civilization is entirely subterranean. 

The surface is a combination of plains, mountains 
and meteorite-created craters. Roaming these plains 
are huge herds of hoska, great herbivores that are an 
important source of food on this world. 


33 


Stephen Crane 


earned for Essowyn is given only to the Council of 
Elders and not spread to the average citizen, the 
high poverty level has bred distrust and resent- 
ment. Many hunters and craftsmen belong to the 
Quenno movement and various splinter groups. 

The Des’mar area minority, but they also have 
the influence of wealth and the full backing of the 
mining companies. They believe that Essowyn 
must remain as it is, with the mining companies 
and continued trade with the rest of the galaxy. 
Supporters of this movement believe that the 
people who want to return to the traditional 
ways are lazy and stupid and should be squashed 
like grasses under a meteorite. Most mining ex- 
ecutives and Council of Elders members are part 
of this group. 

There are several smaller groups with more 
moderate views, but they are also hungry for 
power. Mixed into this conflict is traditional na- 
tionalism — many people of the once free na- 
tions, even centuries after being conquered, be- 
lieve that the ruling government is too weak to 
stop a revolution. 

All of these factors make the cities very tense 
places. With so many factions gaining power, and 
with the tendency of the Saurton to fight over 
anything, many skirmishes have broken out over 
the past few years. These skirmishes have even 
spilled over into the mines, such as the Kussoh 
Incident, in which a manager called a miner a 
“lazy coward.” The ensuing battle resulted in 15 
deaths before the company’s security forces 
could intervene. 

Many of the groups are secretly acquiring 
blasters, explosives and other weapons, and most 
people believe that warfare will occur within the 
next year. The mining companies are desper- 
ately trying to squash the Quenno-sympathetic 
groups, but they have had little success. The 
companies have an open bounty on anyone 
caught supplying weapons to Quennos. 


Government and History 


When Messert Mines Corporation first 
stumbled onto the world, the Saurton were orga- 
nized into several large and constantly warring 
nations. The company approached the largest 
nation, Tresycht, and purchased the rights to 
begin mining in the Thergum Pits. Knowing full 
well that the area was in dispute with another 
nation, Messert moved in its equipment and sev- 
eral squads of security forces. With the help of 
Tresycht warriors, the other nation, Yiszte, was 
subjugated within a few weeks. Soon, all of the 
other nations fell under the control of Tresycht, 
as the nation was armed with modern weaponry 
and given complete training in combat tactics. 
Within four years the entire planet was under the 
control of the Tresycht High Priest, Gellack. 


ARS 


As Gellack tried to establish a government 
sophisticated enough to control an uncoopera- 
tive people, he started empowering high priests 
of the defeated tribes. After several centuries, 
this simple system has evolved into a form of 
government that has been able to hold power 
despite repeated coup attempts. Now, Gellack’s 
ancestors and the ancestors of the other high 
priests sit on the Council of Elders. The council is 
responsible for choosing the 35 Saurton citizens 
(normally wealthy traders or mining executives) 
who form the trashur, or government. The trashur 
is empowered until a majority of the members 
die (vacated seats are left unfilled until a new 
trashur is chosen). This had made for a very 
inflexible, unresponsive and despotic form of 
government, which despite its disadvantages, 
has been able to prevent full-scale warfare 
amongst the Saurton. However, it has encour- 
aged the development of highly fragmented and 
often violent factions. The current governmentis 
in great peril because the world is teetering on 
the brink of civil war, yet because of the conflicts 
within the Council itself, nothing is being done to 
prevent violence. 

The dictates of the Council of Elders are car- 
ried out by the Protectors, a combination judge/ 
policeman/soldier. They are given absolute au- 
thority over law enforcement and punishment 
within given cities, and they are generally aggres- 
sive bullies. 


Mining Companies 

Mining companies establishing operations on 
Essowyn are granted charters for a set number of 
years and are given absolute authority over a 
particular territory, called a Corporate Complex. 
In return for absolute autonomy, the Council of 
Elders receives a large percentage of the profit. 

The mines produce large quantities of 
quadrillium and other metals used in starships, 
vehicles and heavy equipment. 

Within the Corporate Complexes, Saurton are 
allowed to use traditional law and custom (such 
as beating their fellow Saurton who are lazy), 
although they must respect company laws when 
dealing with other races. 

The corporations provide complete quarters 
and facilities for the miners so that they never 
have to venture into Saurton cities (although 
many do for the express purpose of causing 
trouble with the locals). Independent traders can 
secure permits to bring goods into the com- 
plexes. 

Many of the operations are run by Saurton 
who have worked their way up the corporate 
ladder. This has been most beneficial for the 
companies since few Saurton will take orders 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


—_—StT 
-WA 


from another race. The Saurton find the other 
races, particularly the Sullustans, to be weak- 
willed and lacking motivation. 

The mines are dangerous, and quite cramped, 
with little ventilation and light. Droids do much 
of the heavy lifting. Boring many thousands of 
meters into the crust of the planet, cave-ins are 
common even with the advanced technology 
employed, and it is not unusual for a whole shaft 
to cave-in. The pay, however, is excellent so 
there is never a lack of workers. 


The Surface Herds 


Hoska 


DEXTERITY 3D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Orneriness: 4D 

Speed Code: 3D 

Size: 2.7 meters tall at the shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Horns: 4D damage 
Trample: 4D+2 damage 

Combat: Hoska are timid and easily fright- 
ened. Unfortunately, because they gather in herds 
numbering in the thousands, they trample every- 
thingin their path. Additionally, they aren’t smart 
enough to avoid hazards and dangers, so even if 
several dozen of the tribe are killed the survivors 
will mindlessly continue on. 

Using Hoska In The Roleplaying Game: Hoska 
are best used as a seemingly innocent herd of 
creatures, mindlessly grazing the plains of 
Essowyn. However, as soon as one creature has 
been spooked and begins running away, the rest 
of the herd follows, creating an unstoppable 
force that sweeps across the plains. Lightning, 
meteorite impacts, the scent of terecons or a 
blaster shot are all sufficient to stampede a herd. 
They are a prime source of food for the Saurton. 


The hoskaare huge, hoofed quadrupeds stand- 
ing nearly three meters at the shoulder, and 
capable of running at speeds of up to 15 kilome- 
ters per hour. Black is the dominant color, but 
other shades, such as brown, tan, yellow, pale 
red and even white have been found. Each of the 
huge creatures has a set of short but very sharp 
horns that are used to spear anything that gets in 
their way. 

The herds migrate and stampede across the 
plains, eating and trampling everything in their 
path. Few other life forms have been able to 
survive in this environment aside from the 
Saurton, the terecons and a few small, burrowing 
herbivores. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Terecon 


DEXTERITY 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Orneriness: 5D 

Speed Code: 4D 

Size: 1 meter tall, up to 8 meters long 

Scale: Creature 

Armor: +3D to Strength 

Attacks: 

Teeth: 7D damage 

Combat: Terecon hunt hoska herds as their 
only source of food. They are always found in 
groups of about one dozen creatures. 

Using Terecons In The Roleplaying Game: 
Terecons will seldom attack Humans, Saurton or 
other races unless they happen to be caught in 
the middle of an attack on a herd of hoska. 
Watching a group of terecons leap from the 
ground with no warning is an amazing, if not 
horrifying, sight. 

The hoskas’ natural enemy are the carnivorous 
terecons. These large reptiles have short, but pow- 
erful legs. Standing barely a meter tall, these four 
limbed animals are found in groups of at least one 
dozen, and can strike out at a hoska herd with 
amazing swiftness. They are burrowers, and bury 
themselves in the ground while lying in wait for a 
hoska herd to pass by (they can wait for months 
between meals). The mere scent of the terecon can 
cause entire herds to stampede, a fact which 
Saurton hunters have used to great advantage. 


Saurton 


Saurton 


The Saurton are thin, golden-skinned, bipedal 
reptiles. Tall, strong and quick, they possess great 
stamina and a fierce hunting instinct. They are 
warm-blooded, and can survive in cool weather, 
but also lay eggs. They are aggressive and combat- 
ive, and generally not well-liked by other races. The 
race’s advanced immune system allows them to 
avoid the diseases and infections that plague other 
races. Because of this, the Saurton can reside in 
unsanitary conditions with no adverse effects, and 
they are often carriers of diseases. 

Due to the continual meteorite impacts upon 
the surface of the world, these people have devel- 
oped an entirely subterranean culture. With the 
abundance of metals, they also developed ad- 
vanced technology. They had developed radio- 
wave transmission devices, projectile weapons 
and advanced manufacturing machinery before 
their discovery by a mining expedition several 
centuries ago. 

Saurton society revolves around immediate fam- 
ily. Children are given a general education from 
birth until their twelfth year, at which time they 
choose a career and begin intensive training at one 
of the career academies (unless they choose to 
becomea hunter, at which time they are chosen by 


AR 
ARS 


a hunting company and receive training in the 
field). Saurton normally choose their mates from 
within the same occupation, and normally raise 
anywhere from eight to a dozen children. 

The most prestigious career is that of mining 
executive because that is the job responsible for 
producing the most wealth for the planet. These 
executives receive excessively large salaries and 
have no lack of luxury goods. The only way to 
become an executive is to start as a common 
miner and work one's way up. Other common 
careers include hunters (a moderate-prestige 
job), educators (alow-prestige job), craftsmen (a 
low-prestige job) and traders (a high-prestige 
job). The Council of Elders strictly regulates the 
number of openings in each career field to insure 
that there are always enough workers in a given 
job. 

Saurton society has no tolerance of failure. 
Workers are expected to work hard and be re- 
sponsible. Workers who fail at their jobs are 
often beaten and sometimes killed by their co- 
workers and managers. Because the Saurton so- 
ciety is so strictly regulated, many fields offer 
little opportunity for advancement, resulting in 
even more aggression on the part of the average 
citizen (Saurton cities are notoriously violent 
and dangerous). 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are hired to bring a cargo of 
blasters to a Corporate Complex, with the under- 
standing that they are for security forces, Upon 
arrival, they learn that their employer is actually 
a Quenno organization that is planning to take 
over a nearby city. Since the transfer is within a 


Saurton 
Height: 1.75 - 1.90 meters 


DEXTERITY 2D PERCEPTION 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D STRENGTH 2D 
MECHANICAL 1D TECHNICAL 1D 


Roleplaying Hints: The Saurton are ag- 
gressive and eager to fight. They tradition- 
ally are miners, hunters, or occasionally, 


craftsmen. In recent years, many Saurton 
have escaped their planet’s overcrowding, 
typically by accepting positions such as 
mine managers, traders, or scouts. Others 
have become bounty hunters. 

Quote: “This is no time to compromise, 
friend (snicker). You have something I need, 
and because my need is greater, I shall have 
it. Now, hand it over to me, or lose it and 
gain much pain.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


ST 
-WA 


The Black Butcher 


Craft: The Black Butcher 
Captain: Vin Feal 
Type: Modified Nova-drive 
#3-Z Light Freighter 
Length: 28 meters 
Scale: Starfighter 
Crew: 3 
Passengers: 10 
Cargo Capacity: 150 metric 
tons 
Consumables: 1 month 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Hyperdrive Backup: Yes 
Sublight Speed: 2D 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Hull: 5D 
Weapons: 
Dual Laser Cannons 
(fire linked) 
Fire Control: 2D 
Damage: 6D 
Single Laser Cannon 
Fire Control: 1D 
Damage: 3D 
Shields: 1D+2 


C Access 
fiatch 


Corporate Complex, the characters must try to 
disguise the nature of the cargo or else they will 
be gunned down for arms smuggling. They then 
have a moral dilemma to solve for themselves: 
Do they want to get involved in the revolution? 
Should they try and reclaim the weapons so that 
they will not have to worry about having a bounty 
placed on their heads? Can they escape the Com- 
plex without being discovered? Will one of the 
Des’Mar groups discover what has happened 
and attempt to hunt down the characters them- 
selves, or try to attack the Quenno first? 


Adventure Idea 


A Saurton hunter approaches the characters 
witha proposition. He would like the Rebels to stop 
a bunch of traders that have driven the hoska 
herds away from the city. If they can subdue the 
traders, he promises that he will beable to sway his 
hunting company tojoin the Alliance's cause, which 
would help the Alliance acquire new weapons, and 
raw materials for starships (the company could 
buy the materials for the Rebellion and then dis- 
creetly ship it to a manufacturing world). 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Dual Laser 
Cannons 


Power Core 


Sublight Drive 


ITAN 


poe mp Single Laser 


Cannon 


The following ship, The Black Butcher, can be 
used as the home base of the troublesome trader. 
The captain/owner of the ship, Vin Feal, can be 
used as a continuing villain, especially if the 
characters are in a tramp freighter campaign. 


e Vin Feal: DEX 2D+2, blaster 4D+2, dodge 4D, 
heavy weapons 5D, melee parry 3D+1, melee 
3D+2; KNO 1D+2, alien races 2D, cultures 2D+1, 
languages 2D, planetary systems 2D+2; MEC 3D, 
astrogation 4D+2, repulsorlift op 5D, starship 
gunnery 6D, starship piloting 6D+2, starship 
shields 4D; PER 2D, con 4D; STR 2D+1; TEC 2D+2, 
repulsorlift repair 3D+1, starship repair 4D 

Description: Vin Feal is a shady trader who is 
willing to make a deal with anyone. He is a thin 
human, with close-cropped red hair and sidelocks. 
His protective vest and cloak are bright red, with 
brown fasteners and trim. He has an arrogant air 
about him and commands attention no matter 
what situation he is in. 

Equipment: Heavy blaster pistol (5D), blaster 
rifle (SD), protective helmet (STR +1), vibroaxe 
(STR +2D), cloak. 


Quadex 


Engines 


Esso 


John Paul Lona 


System Summary 


Garnib is the only life sustaining planet of the 
four bodies orbiting the blue star of the same 
name. Hultomo, Mastala, and Coomputu are all 
dead, frozen hunks of rockand water. The distant 
orbits of all of the worlds keep them in a near 
perpetual state of twilight. 

Were it not for the ingenuity of the Balinaka, 
Garnib would be an ignored and valueless world. 
However, the Balinakan love for sculpting ice and 
a chance discovery by Balinaka artists resulted 
in the fantastic and mesmerizing Garnib Crystals. 
The planet is owned and run by Galactic Crystal 
Creations, an employee-owned corporation, so 
while it is a “corporate world,” it is also a world 
where the people have absolute say over how the 
company, and thus their civilization, is managed. 

Over the decades, the crystals have enrap- 
tured (some say addicted) millions, with some 
people owning collections numbering in the thou- 
sands. The fame of the crystals and the Balinaka 
reputation as lovers of art helped make the world 
an attractive community for artists from all over 
the galaxy. Many artists arrive with only the 
clothes on their backs (hardly sufficient for the 
numbing cold of the glacier winds). Invariably a 
Balinaka family takes the artist into their home, 
providing heat, food and support, at least until 
they establish their own lives. Many of the most 
respected artists of the galaxy lived on Garnib at 
one time or another. 


Garnib Crystals 


Garnib Crystals are the end result of a complex 
manufacturing process that deftly mixes art with 
science. The Balinaka have excellent vision and are 
able to see in a much wider spectrum than Hu- 
mans, Their tradition of making personalized ice 
sculptures dates back thousands of years, and 
ever since the first sculpture was carved by the 
claws of these amphibious mammals, they were 
judged on the basis of sheer physical beauty and 
how thesculptures refracted light (of course, most 
Humans cannotsee theslight light refraction varia- 
tions that to the Balinaka make the difference 
between a crude sculpture and a true work of art). 

The great sculptor Vornest Dep-thesel 
Digarsarg first incorporated colored pumice and 
small fragments of gemstones in one of his sculp- 
tures, creating a sculpture he called “Crystal of 
the Stars.” When he completed the sculpture and 
first brought it into the sunlight, he was amazed 
at the beauty of the light as it filtered through the 


gems and glass, and found it impossible to turn 
his eyes away from the remarkable light. One of 
his trader friends, ahuman named Abram Zavict, 
happened upon the scene and also felt the hyp- 
notic effects of the sculpture. He immediately 
realized that similar sculptures could be sold on 
other planets for amazing profits, and such was 
the birth of Galactic Crystal Creations. 

The crystal creation process has several steps, 
all of them requiring the meticulous attention of 
several skilled artisans. The crystals aren’t mass 
produced, but instead are individualized works 
of art. 

A Balinaka sculptor begins the process by 
carving the sculpture from a block of ice. The 
gemmaster polishes, smooths and carves intri- 
cate designs in the gems and glass, while the 
sculptor uses sonic smoothers to put the finish- 
ing touches on the sculpture. 

Theiceand gems are brought to one of the great 
crystal mills, where a thread master weaves frag- 
ments ofthe gems and glass intoa molecular string, 
that is then sewn into the interior of the crystal. 
Simultaneously the sculptor and gemmaster set 
the full-sized gems directly into the crystal. 

After several hours of labor, the inlaid crystal is 
placed in a sonic bath while the team of artisans 
inspectsit forits artistic value and beauty. The final 
product is sold to GCC, which in turn sells the 
crystals to tramp freighters and companies (at a 
tremendous markup) for distribution around the 


galaxy. 


The Crystal Factories 


Thecrystal factories of GCC are small, graceful 
buildings designed by the greatest Balinaka sculp- 
tors. A mixture of sharp angles, graceful sweep- 
ing curves and fluid motorized sculptures, they 
are truly an unusual sight. Each factory is modu- 
lar, so that rooms and entire sections can be 
removed and replaced (this is done so that the 
artists, gemmasters and thread masters can make 
for themselves the most comfortable and appeal- 
ing work space possible), Within each factory are 
a series of rooms called crystal mills, which 
house the sonic baths for the final shaping of the 
crystals. 

The interior of each room, from crystal mill, to 
the working studios, to the packaging rooms, to 
executive offices, are decorated and designed by 
the user, making each room unique in character. 

The factories are positioned near active volca- 
noes or fissures in the ocean floor. The factory 
turbines utilize geothermal energy, providing 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Ee y y 


L O G 


PLANET 


Planet Name 
Garnib 


Type: Terrestrial 


Planet Type 
Glacial Continents 


Hydrosphere: Saturated 

Gravity: Standard 

Terrain: Frigid oceans, glaciers, islands 
Length of Day: 35 Hours 

Length of Year: 432 Local Days 


SYSTEM DATA 
System Name: Garnib 


ORBITAL BODIES 
Planet Type 


| Mastaa | Frigid Rock Planet 
Frigid Rock Planet 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Solid Glacier Solid Glacier 


© Crystal 


Solid Glacier Factory 


World Summary 


The ice world of Garnib, home of the Balinaka 
race, is the only source of the addictive “Garnib 
Crystals,” known throughout the galaxy for their 
indescribable beauty. The world itself is very cold 
(by Human standards), with several continents cov- 
ered by glaciers dozens of meters thick. The Balinaka 
have carved entire underground cities, called sewfes 
with their settlements having a strange mixture of 
simple tools, ice sculptures and modern devices. 

The world is also home to the wallarand, a festival 
lasting for fifty local days in the height of the “warm” 
summer season. The wallarand is the ultimate ex- 
pression ofthe artistic, carefree spirit of the Balinaka 
people, who find art and joy in the constant struggle 
against nature. 

The gregarious spirit of the Balinaka calls to the 
hearts of artists across the galaxy, and thousands 
have emigrated to the frigid world. Within the caves 
of ice, the artists find inspiration in the sculptures 
and nature itself, while they find a hard, but reward- 
ing living manning the fishing fleets of the world or 
working in the Garnib Crystal plants. 


39 


Stephen Crane 


Crystal Addiction 


While Garnib Crystals are beautiful and 
captivating, they represent an “addictive 
threat” to some. When placed in sunlight, 
the crystals seem to pulse with a pure white 
light. Beams of light, brilliant and constantly 


fluctuating in color, will periodically shoot 
from the crystal. 

A very small number of people seem to 
become addicted to these crystals upon first 
viewing, and from that point on insist on 
purchasing as many different crystals as they 
can. It is theorized that they are merely 
overstimulated by the ocular effects of the 
crystals and develop a psychological need to 
have more and different experiences. Due to 


power to every room. All excess energy is freely 
given to nearby Balinaka communities (in fact, 
most communities, called sewfes, receive their 
power from the factory turbines). 


A Beautiful World 


The stark landscape of Garnib is beautiful in 
its stark brutality. Great glaciers form huge arti- 
ficial islands and deep valleys, as their bulk grinds 
and reforms the land below. A great sea of solid 
white creates a constant blinding glare, with the 
ice only ended by the vast oceans and the rare 
volcanic islands. 

Few creatures make their homes on the sur- 
face of the planet, the Balinaka people being the 
most prominent. Of the few creatures that do 
survive, most are amphibious and survive by 
eating fish or aquatic plants. 

The Balinaka make every effort to convey to 
visitors the harsh realities of Garnib’s wilderness 
— being caught out in the cold typically ends not 
with rescue, but death. 


The Great Caves 


The Balinaka make their homes in great ice 
caverns that they carve themselves. Since each 
cave is custom built, there is a great variety in 
style, layout and facilities. The Balinaka are very 
social creatures, and each home is centered 
around a common room, which is a workplace, 
casual lounge, kitchen and recreation area. Most 
of a family’s modern appliances, such as comput- 
ers, holovid monitors, and sonicooks, will be 
found in the common room. Each adult family 
member has a small cubicle for privacy, while 
children and infants share a common room. 

Each cave, aside from the artistic structure of 
the cave itself, is decorated with ice sculptures, 


the extremely high cost of these crystals, 
these addictions are normally quite self-de- 
structive. 

The reaction is disturbing enough that 
several planets have banned the crystals, 
making them a valuable black market com- 
modity. The Balinaka are greatly upset that 
something intended to be so beautiful in- 
stead has madelifeso ugly for some, and thus 
they have an open door policy for anyone 
suffering from “crystal addiction.” If an ad- 
dicted person can get to Garnib, a family will 
takethe personin, utilizing advanced therapy 
techniques to help them get over the addic- 
tion. 


holosculptures, rugs, custom built furniture and 
other items to reflect the personality of the family. 


Artist Communities 


There are several artist communities of aliens 
that have sprung up within Balinaka sewfes. Their 
caves and lifestyles closely mimic the Balinaka, 
with acommon room and only small cubicles for 
privacy. Each member has certain, regularly 
scheduled duties, such as cleaning or cooking. 
Still, even after a day’s work (typically working in 
acrystal factory or ona fishing ship), most artists 
have several hours at their disposal for sculp- 
ture, song, or writing. These communities are 
generally not as harmonious as the Balinaka 
dens, but they are nonetheless close-knit. 


Fishing Ships 

The Balinaka, due to their amphibious nature, 
have located most of their settlements near the 
shores of the great oceans. The fishing ships, 
also owned by GCC, are based in the massive 
harbors of Garnib and go out every morning to 
troll the oceans of the world. The work is back 
breaking (even with most of the work being done 
by Droids), but the pay is high. Many Balinaka are 
fishermen (regarding fishing as an art form of its 
own), and many of the artists who have traveled 
to this world find employment in this,industry. 


Settlements 


All Balinaka families live in one of the sewfes. 
Being the social creatures that they are, each 
community has a large open area, called aheswe, 
that serves as a meeting area, playground, mar- 
ket and religious center. Messages to the whole 
community are posted here, and whenever there 
is a celebration, artists donate ice sculptures, 
while lights and holoflashers are placed. Fire- 
works, live music, dancing, feasts and costume 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


ee, 


-WA 


parties are integral parts of many community 
events. 


The Wallarand 


Scheduled for the height of the summer sea- 
son, the wallarand is a once a year event that is a 
combination town meeting, stock holders meet- 
ing, party and feast rolled up into one. GCC 
headquarters selects the sight of the wallarand, 
and then each community sends one artist to 
help carve the buildings and sculptures for the 
temporary city that will host the event. Work 
begins with the arrival of winter, as huge halls for 
meetings, temporary residences, and market 
place booths are carved out of the ice. 

As the wallarand nears, all work on the planet 
ceases, as communities are allowed to begin 
preparations for the long trek to the city site. 
Every resident of Garnib, from Balinaka to immi- 
grants, is invited (or more properly, expected) to 
attend. Over the next four days, friendships are 
renewed, deals are made, romances blossom. It 
is a time of constant festivals and parties. 

Of course, there is a purpose in it all (aside from 
fun, which is more than enough of a reason to the 
Balinaka). Each community selects a spokesman 
to represent them to other communities and cor- 
porate officers. Fishing territories are redrawn, 
quotas for ice sculpture production are set, and 
any other differences or needs are discussed and 
debated (most issues are resolved by the end of 
the wallarand). At the end of these meetings, every 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


citizen (who is also an employee and stockholder 
for GCC) is presented with a complete accounting 
of the financial status of GCC. The citizens then 
select new corporate officials and vote on what 
new projects and investments they feel the com- 
pany should undertake. 

The wallarand is where the Balinaka are most 
painfully reminded that they are Imperial subjects. 
The Empire seldom interferes with the Balinaka 
because the corporate officers arrange appropri- 
ate income percentages for the Imperial governor. 
However, Imperial troops are constantly seen pa- 
trolling the grounds of the wellarand, which is a 
source of tension, anxiety and resentment. It is 
amazing that open conflict has not erupted be- 
tween the agreeable but fiercely independent 
Balinaka and the Imperial officials. 


Vernols 


Height: 1.4 meters 

DEXTERITY 1D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

MECHANICAL 1D+1 

PERCEPTION 3D+2 

STRENGTH 1D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D+1 

Roleplaying Hints: The Vernols have come to 
Garnib in great numbers; they are squat human- 
oids with blue skin and orange highlights (the 
orange colors around their eyes, mouth and on 
the underside of their palms and feet). Many of 
them have come to Garnib simply to become part 


Balinaka 


of what they feel is a safe and secure society 
(much of their native civilization was destroyed 
when a meteor collided with their world five 
decades ago). 

They are foragers by nature, adept at finding 
food, water or other things of importance. Many 
of them have become skilled investigators on 
other planets. Others have become wealthy con 
men since they have a cheerful, skittish demeanor 
that lulls strangers into a sense of security. 

They are fearful and territorial, but extremely 
loyal to those who have proven their friendship. 
Vernols are quite diverse, and can be found in 
many occupations on many worlds. Garnib is the 
only world where they live in large communities. 


The Imperial Presence 


Imperial Governor Verus Carbinol is respon- 
sible for law and order on the world of Garnib. He 
hates cold. He hates ice. He hates the endlessly 
cheerful attitude of the Balinaka. And, most of all, 
he hates his life. 

Both middle-aged and at what he feels should 
be the prime of his career, he realizes that this 
planet is the end of the line for him. However, his 
world is also quiet enough that he has no over- 
whelming worries or meddlesome trouble spots; 
he can just sit back and wait for the money to 
come into his coffers. 


ARa 
ARS 


Carbinol is reclusive and seldom leaves his 
mansion, a gaudy 47-room affair that stands on 
the coast of the ocean. He will seldom be encoun- 
tered by the Balinaka or anyone else on the 
planet. 

The only Imperial base, Garnib Station, has a 
modest three battalions, and is located next to 
his mansion. However, because the Balinaka are 
decidedly agreeable and consistently pay their 
taxes with no complaints, there is virtually no 
need for them to patrol communities. The troops 
are dispatched to the wallarand so that Carbinol 
can assert his authority. Therefore, while being 
stationed on Garnib is a generally chilly and 
cheerless experience, it is also an extremely safe 
and inactive post. 


Balinaka 


The Balinaka are strong amphibious mam- 
mals native to Garnib. Evolved in an arctic cli- 
mate, they are covered with thick fur, but they 
also have a dual lung/gill system so they can 
breathe air or water. They have webbing be- 
tween each digit, as well as a long, flexible tail. 
Their diet consists mostly of fish. 

Balinaka have very sensitive eyes, being able 
to see in a visual spectrum far exceeding human 
vision. In addition to a high degree of color 
sensitivity, they have aseries of membranes that 
help them filter and control how they perceive 
light — a Balinak can look at a sculpture directly 
in front of a blinding light and can adjust his 
perception so that he sees only the sculpture. 

The Balinaka are individualistic, but very close 


Balinaka 
Height: 4 meters at the shoulder 


DEXTERITY 2D PERCEPTION 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D STRENGTH 4D 
MECHANICAL 2D TECHNICAL 1D 


Vision: Balinaka have excellent vision. 
Treat all dark conditions as if there was full 
daylight. 

Roleplaying Hints: A Balinak is strong 
and none too tame. They seem playful, even 
flippant in serious situations, but are smart 
and know how to handle a crisis. They 
dislike people who regard them as primi- 
tive, unsophisticated savages. They enjoy 
the challenges of mastering a new technol- 
ogy. Balinaka take great pride in their ice 
sculptures, which they (and many other 
races) consider great works of art. 

Quote: “Guyef-do? Guyef-tes, nosyarg, 
jefsewarg.” (Translation — “Hypothermia- 
me? Hypothermia-you, insult-me-not, dunk- 
water-not!”) 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


GARNIB DIAGRAM 


“A 


— The Wallarand 


Meeting Building 


Ice Sculptures ow pa $ 
i slide A 


Heswe-karr 


Aa. 


¢ e 
l4 a 6 
AN $ Las) 

$ - 23. 3} 


/ 


WAR 


to their families and larger community. They are 
an agreeable race as long as they know that the 
other people involved are also willing to agree or 
compromise. They often refuse to debate issues 
with individuals who are stubborn, selfish or 
unwilling to see a different point of view. They 
have gone along with the Empire simply because 
they realize that fighting is a losing proposition, 
although they would be willing to fight for free- 
dom as soon as they. saw that there was a good 
chance of winning. 

While these people are fun and easy going, 
they can be deadly fighters in combat. Their 
sharp claws can do great damage to those care- 
less enough to anger a Balinaka. They are a 
playful people, always looking forward to the 
next celebration. They enjoy dancing, singing, 
light shows, plays, sculpting and many other 
forms of relaxation. They are inquisitive and 
curious — eager to learn new technology and to 
master new devices. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


= a 


Adventure Idea 


Two Rebel agents on the run from Imperial 
authorities need assistance getting to Garnib, 
which would bean excellent place to hide. Every- 
thing seems to be working to plan, until what 
else, the Imperial troops think that the charac- 
ters’ ship would be a good place to begin spot 
checking for smuggling. It becomes imperative 
that the characters somehow convince the Impe- 
rials that “these are not the agents you're looking 
for,” or find some means to avoid the inspection 
entirely. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are hired to take a partial cargo 
of Garnib Crystals to the planet Zarsteck. During 
their stopover on Garnib, an artist suggests that 
GCC may be willing to offer them a long-term 
contract (which would mean big profits), however, 
nothing could beagreed on untilthenew corporate 
officers are selected at the wallarand. Unfortu- 
nately for the characters, some long-term rivals 
(such as bounty hunters, a competing freighter, or 
disgruntled pirates) have followed them to Garnib 
and want to kill them. The characters must dodge 
the villains for several days while waiting for the 
wallarand to begin. 


Jann Paui Lona 


System Summary 


The Gorsh system lies in one of the most 
undeveloped regions of the Outer Rim Territo- 
ries, well over 30 hours (at hyperdrive multiplier 
x1) from any settled systems. It was first discov- 
ered by an independent scout nearly a century 
ago, and merely logged as yet another nonde- 
script system; the scout moved on to other sys- 
tems looking for something that he could easily 
turn a profit on. 

Gorsh is the only habitable world of the six 
planets orbiting the star Gorsh. Genetech Labora- 
tories financed the first extensive explorations of 
the system and the Empire granted the company 
exclusive proprietary rights over everything within 
the system. 

Genetech has a small orbiting research lab, 
lightly armed and with the bare minimum of sup- 
plies. However, the scientists stationed aboard 
this lab have been able to discover many valuable 
compounds that have been developed into useful 
pharmaceuticals and medicines. 


Gorsh 


Gorsh is a tropical world with a very high mois- 
ture content. Most of the surface is open ocean, 
with many large swampy islands. Temperature 
ranges from 25 to 40 degrees Celsius, with the 
cooler areas being over the open ocean. The 
swamps have a very high humidity level, making 
them muggy and generally unpleasant. Ocean 
depths average nearly six kilometers, but the maxi- 
mum depth reaches nearly nine kilometers. 


Gorsh’s Atmosphere - 
Gorsh’s high carbon dioxide atmosphere and heavy 


gravity hamper the activities of beings not native to high 
gravity worlds. Characters acting without breath masks 
suffer penalties for high levels of activity. To run for more 
than two consecutive turns, a character must make a 
Moderate stamina check. A character must make an Easy 
stamina check after every three rounds of fire combat to 
see if he is winded. A character must make a Moderate 
stamina check after every three rounds of melee or un- 
armed combat. Finally, for any lifting checks, increase the 
difficulty by one level. If a character fails any stamina 
checks, he is thoroughly winded and must rest for one 
minute or suffer a -3D penalty to all actions. 

Characters with breath masks can act in the atmo- 
sphere of Gorsh with no fear of penalties. 


44 


The Swamps 


The swamp islands of Gorsh are dangerous 
and unstable. The islands were formed by the 
volcanic peaks, volcanic ash, aquatic plant life 
and sediment. The tallest of the volcanic peaks is 
only 268 meters above sea level, and the swamps 
extend away from the mountains for many square 
kilometers. The islands are crisscrossed by shal- 
low waterways. Plant and animal life can be found 
throughout the islands. 

Trekking through the swamps can be very 
hazardous. Without some device to measure the 
depth of water, it is impossible to tell whether or 
not open pools of water have land six centime- 
ters or six meters beneath. Poisonous creatures, 
both plants and animals, abound, and many of 
them have natural camouflage so that they blend 
into the background until they are close enough 
to strike. Infectious diseases are spread by in- 
sects, sudden storms coming in from the ocean 
can strike without warning, and there is always 
the possibility of a dangerous volcanic eruption 
that can send molten lava, ash and toxic fumes 
into the air or cause a landslide that will bury 
anything caught in its path. 

Insects and amphibians are the most common 
creatures. Because of the relatively constant cli- 
mate, cold-blooded creatures have thrived in 
this environment. Most creatures have formi- 
dable natural defenses, such as venomous bites, 
large spikes or strong tails for swatting bother- 
some pests. 

Even the plants are dangerous on Gorsh: the 
Gorshian Hands of Death is a large (6 meters 
across) carnivorous flowering plant that has 
crushed more than one careless research scien- 
tist. Berries, such as Darkkoninns, havea poison- 
ous juice. . 

Another danger of Gorsh comes from the na- 
ture of the land itself. The constantly decaying 
plant matter creates a huge amount of explosive 
methane. The methane normally builds in small 
pockets beneath the surface of the water. The 
methane compounds are undetectable in the 
fetid swamp air — unless there happens to be an 
open flame or a heat source nearby. Exploding 
pockets of methane have been known to con- 
sume an area up to 20 meters in diameter. 

However, Genetech has found that where there 
is danger, there is profit. There are many amazing 
chemicals produced by the plants and animals of 
Gorsh that have been discovered by research 
teams, and they have been refined, developed, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


|, AR 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Type 
Gorsh Warm Swamp 


Gravity: Heavy 
Terrain: Ocean, Swamp Islands 


Length of Year: 300 Local Days 


Sentient Races: Humans, Orgons(N) 
Points of Interest: Genetech Laboratories Orbital 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Gorsh 


Gorsh 


Length of Day: 64 Hours 


Star Name: Star Type: Yellow 


ORBITAL BODIES 
a ae E 
Desolate Searing Rock 


Frigid Ice 


12 
2 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


O Genetech 
Research Lab 
(in orbit) 


World Summary 


Gorsh is an obscure system, located in an unde- 
veloped section of the Outer Rim Territories. The 
world of prime interest, also named Gorsh, is domi- 
nated by huge, but shallow salt water oceans. Several 
chains of volcanic and swamp islands dot the sur- 
face. These swamps are home to many kinds of 
lifeforms, including the mysterious sentient plants 
called Orgons. 

Genetech Laboratories has exclusive rights to 
develop and explore the planet Gorsh, and has estab- 
lished an orbiting research lab. The world has yielded 
many unique compounds that have been turned into 
successful pharmaceutical and medicinal products. 
The company has discovered the Orgons, and has 
placed a high priority on capture and examination of 
the creatures, with the ultimate goal of seeing if the 
plant creatures can be used for scientific research. 
Only authorized Imperial personnel and Genetech 
representatives may enter the system. 


45 


Stephen Crane 


analyzed, and ultimately packaged into profitable 
drugs, medicines and consumer goods. 


Flora and Fauna of Gorsh 


What follows is a listing of the most danger- 
ous, interesting and important animals and plants 
to be found on Gorsh. They can be used to spice 
up any adventure set in the dismal swamps of 
this world. 


Thevaxan Marauder 


DEXTERITY 2D 

Unarmed combat 4D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 5D 

Speed Code: 2D 

Size: Up to 20 meters long, about 8 meters 

tall at the shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Tail Swipe: 7D damage 

Teeth: 5D damage 

Charge: 5D damage, plus 1D for every 
speed action that round 

Combat: The Thevaxan Marauder has many 
great survival advantages but stealth isn’t one of 
them. When the creature is near the characters, 
they should be able to hear it plowing through 
the swamp. It relies primarily on the fact that it 
can overpower whatever it encounters, and it is 
very good in close combat. The creature is dim- 
witted and easily tricked or confused. 

Using Thevaxan Marauders In The Roleplay- 
ing Game: This creature is a solitary hunter, 
although characters may be unfortunate enough 
to discover a female’s nest, which will have 1-4 
eggs or young (about 2 meters long, and reduce 
Strength by -3D, Dexterity by -1D and Perception 
down to 2 pips). If not raising young, the Maraud- 
ers have no nests or lairs, and will always be 
encountered hunting for a fresh meal. When they 
rest, they bury themselves in muck and water, 
exposing only their nostrils. 


Thevaxan Marauders are long lizards, brown, 
black or drab green in color. Their tails make up 
nearly half of their length. They are covered with 
smooth triangular scales, and a crest of small 
spikes runs from the tip of the elongated snout to 
the beginning of the tail. They have long, triangu- 
lar heads, with a large upper skull. 


Darkkoninns 


Size: Up to one centimeter across 
Attacks: 
Poison: 6D damage 
Using Darkoninns In The Roleplaying Game: 
These black poisonous berries grow in bunches, 
and can be found anywhere on Gorsh. Any char- 


acter making a Moderate survival roll will realize 
that they are poisonous. 


Gorshian Hands of Death 


DEXTERITY 0D 

Unarmed combat 3D 

PERCEPTION 0D 

STRENGTH 4D 

Size: 3-6 meters across 

Scale: Character 

Attacks: 

Crushing Grasp: 4D damage 

Combat: The Gorshian Hands of Death is a 
flowering carnivorous plant. Any character who 
walks across one of the flowered stalks must 
make an opposed unarmed combat or Dexterity 
check to escape its crushing grasp. If the charac- 
ter fails, it will be completely enclosed within the 
stalks and take damage from the crushing attack 
each round. 

Using Gorshian Hands Of Death In The Role- 
playing Game: These plants will be found only in 
drier regions of the swamps (such as in the upper 
elevations and near volcanic peaks). They have 
spindly stalks that are decorated with five-petaled 
blue and purple flowers. 


Forntarch 


DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Speed Code: 3D (leaping), 1D (crawling) 

Size: .3 meters long (body); 1 meter long 

(slicers) 

Scale: Character 

Attacks: 

Slicers: 4D+2 damage 

Combat: Forntarch are dangerous carnivorous 
rodents that lie in trees waiting for a warm meal to 
pass by. While they typically dine on small reptiles, 
lizards and mammals, they do attack humans as 
well. When a target passes by, they use their 
powerful legs toleap from the tree. Tumbling down 
at the unsuspecting victim, they attack with their 
forelimbs, which are giant razored appendages. 
Even if the first attack is not fatal, they often impale 
their victims with one limb, while swinging the 
other and biting the victim. 

Using Forntarch In The Roleplaying Game: 
Forntarch will often surprise characters in an 
ambush. They are yet another example of how 
creatures can adapt to an environment as harsh 
as Gorsh’s. 


Tesfli Piercers 


DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 0D 
STRENGTH 0D 
Speed Code: 1D 


46 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Size: 14 centimeters long 
Scale: Character (suffer +10 difficulty 
because of their small size) 

Attacks: 

Bite: No damage, but possible infection 

Combat: Tesfli Piercers are flyinginsects. They 
cause no actual damage, but anyone bit by such 
a creature must make a Very Easy stamina check 
or be infected by the “rotting disease.” If they 
become infected, within one week, the limb will 
swell and turn black — if the character seeks 
medical attention, treat it as a wound. After two 
more weeks, the limb will be considered inca- 
pacitated for healing difficulty, and the character 
will be at-1D for all Strength and Dexterity actions 
requiring use of the limb. After another two weeks, 
consider the limb mortally wounded for healing 
and take off -2D. At the end of a total of seven 
weeks, the limb is totally useless, as the infection 
has destroyed all of the nerve endings and the 
muscle tissue. This may not seem like such a 
dangerous disease except for the fact that a 
character could conceivably receive dozens of 
bites if he was attacked by an entire swarm. 

Using Tesfli Piercers In The Roleplaying 
Game: These flying insects must be dealt with in 
some manner other than direct combat: open 
flame or insect repellants do scare them off, and 
exposure to cold will kill them. They cannot bite 
through clothing, plastics or armor. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


A 


Ų a \ 


Swarm Bugs 


DEXTERITY 1D 

PERCEPTION 0D 

STRENGTH 0D 

Speed Code: 1D 

Size: up to 10 centimeters long 

Scale: character (suffer +10 difficulty 

because of their small size) 

Attacks: 

Methane Burst: 2D damage to everyone 
within 2 meter burst radius, with up to 
2D damage each round for burning 
objects until fire is extinguished. 

Combat: Swarm bugs do not actually attack 
large creatures, but because of their tendency to 
fly in swarms numbering in the hundreds they 
can present quite a nuisance. Of course, anyone 
using flame to try and ward off these insects will 
be in for a painful surprise. 

Using Swarm Bugs In The Roleplaying Game: 
Swarm Bugs are blue insects, with large ballooning 
bodies (taken up mostly by a large methane blad- 
der) and fragile, transparent wings. Their unusual 
digestive tracts create a great deal of methane, so 
that if they are ever struck by a hard blow or 
subjected to high temperatures, they are quite 
likely to explode in a ball of flame (roll 1D; if struck 
bya flame, they explode ona 1-3; ifstruck by a blunt 
object, they explode on a 1). Unfortunately, they 
also tend to fly in tightly packed swarms, so if one 
bug explodes (for whatever reason), most of the 
swarm will go up in flames. The methane bladder is 


Gorsh 


N 


r A 
ENN 


E| 


BEB tiin.s 


Drian 


a species defense mechanism, so although indi- 
viduals and entire swarms may be sacrificed, most 
other creatures on Gorsh have learned to give 
these insects a wide berth. 


Research Teams 


Genetech research teams venture down to the 
surface of Gorsh on a regular basis, with about 
one dozen scientists and a few armed guards for 
protection. The teams are equipped with sur- 
vival gear, medicines, breath masks, weapons, 
specimen containers, chemical analyzers, pocket 
computers, biochem synthesizers and field gear 
to assist them in their efforts. Research teams 
spend up to two weeks on the planet’s surface. 

Remote probes are also sent down and can be 
controlled directly from the lab. Ifthe probe finds 
anything of note, a followup team is sent to 
investigate. 


Typical Genetech Scientist 


DEXTERITY 1D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien races 3D+2, organic chemistry 5D, 
planetary systems 4D, survival 4D 
MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 1D+2 


in 
ARS 


In addition to the discovery of new chemicals, 
the Genetech researchers have recently discov- 
ered the Orgons and the company has placed a 
very high priority on the capture and dissection 
of one of these strange creatures. The company 
has kept this discovery quiet, fearing that the 
Empire or another corporation may decide to 
investigate their activities on Gorsh. 


Genetech Orbiting Research Lab 


The Genetech Orbiting Research Lab is the 
home base of the scientists stationed on Gorsh. 
Housing a total of 40 personnel, it is the only 
lifeline between this system and the rest of the 
civilized galaxy. Although cramped and spartan, 
the space lab and its personnel have been very 
successful in finding and developing new prod- 
ucts for the company. 


Orgons 


Orgons are the dominant life form of Gorsh. 
These intelligent and mobile plants have two 
distinct sections of their bodies. The brain and 
vital organs are in a round, hardened shell, nor- 
mally about half of a meter in diameter. The shell 
is a deep green or yellow color. Trailing away 
from the shell are anywhere from six to eight 
tendrils, up to four meters long (the number is 
dependent upon the age of the individual Orgon). 

Each limb is used for mobility as well as ab- 
sorption of vital nutrients. The limbs are soft and 
flexible, but incredibly strong, through use of 
alternating hard armored cells (which provide 
protection), and cells that perform the same 
function as muscles in animals. By constricting 
or loosening these soft cells, the creatures can 
drag themselves through the swamps or use 


Orgons 
Height: 1.5 meters 


DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
Biochemistry 4D 
MECHANICAL 1D 


PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 4D 
TECHNICAL 0D 


Movement: Orgons move 3 meters per 
speed action. 
Natural Camouflage: +2D to hideinjungle 


terrain. 

Resistance to Blunt Weapons: +1D to 
Strength for resisting damage from blunt 
weapons. 

Roleplaying Hints: Orgons are cryptic 
to most other sentient races, although they 
can communicate complex ideas amongst 
themselves. They will attempt to hide from 
most humans. 

Quote: Not applicable. 


48 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


tools. In order to absorb nutrients, the limbs 
must be burrowed in the soil. Each limb is also 
equipped with a very complex nervous system 
that constantly relays tactile data to the brain. 
Because of the nature of the hard shells and the 
flexibility of their bodies, Orgons can better re- 
sist damage from blunt (non-bladed) attacks, 
such as clubs. 

They are sensitive to light, and while they 
don’t have vision in the traditional sense of most 
other carbon-based sentient life forms, they can 
“see” light and reflected light within a large area 
around them. 

Orgons are almost always found alone. Be- 
cause of the slow movement rate of the Orgons, 
the development of intelligence was the only 
thing that saved them from extinction. Since they 
cannot “catch” prey through normal hunting 
methods, they have learned to make very potent 
poisons and adhesives, as well as traps. They can 
then lumber over to the site and consume the 
creature at their leisure (their limbs also secrete 


Genetech Orbiting 
Research Lab 


Height: 53 meters 
Diameter: 22 meters 
Scale: Starfighter 
Facilities: 
Personnel: 
30 research scientists 
10 corporate guards 
15 research labs/specimen 
facilities 
1 docking hood 
4 three-person drop- 
_ shuttles 
1 10-person research 
shuttle 
12 automated research 
probes 
Hull: 9D 
Weapons: 


f Qu 
Kitchen 
Lounge 


Living Quarters 


Automated Probe 
Launch Tube 


digestive fluids). Orgons need to only eat about 
three kilograms of meat per standard year. 

The creatures communicate with each other 
by very precise movement of their limbs. The 
Genetech research scientists have not yet learned 
how intelligent the Orgons are. Many of the “won- 
der chemicals” that Genetech has discovered 
have actually been Orgon compounds. 

The Orgons have learned to shy away from 
contact with genetech scientists. They have also 
developed a very potent poison which they have 
liberally applied to plants and berries in the 
vicinity of Genetech encampments. 

The worst weapon in the arsenal is a cluster of 
red goo Humans would namea “skin buster.” The 
sticky substance is filled with an irritant sap 
which leads to a screaming insane death in only 
a few short minutes, unless appropriate medi- 
cines are applied quickly. The weapon does 6D 
damage upon initial contact, with 4D damage per 
turn after the first (a maximum of ten turns). It 
only works on exposed skin. 


i Sensor 
a A 


EE? 


—_-— 
—— 
— 
n —— 
— 


L 
— 
u 
ri 


Array 


Research 
Labs 


Docking Bay 
Drop-Shuttles 
Research Shuttle 
Maintenance 


Dual Laser Cannons 
(fire-linked) 
Scale: Capitol ship 
Fire Control: 2D 
Damage: 3D 


D eccnerec 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 49 


PPC PL SOS SFOS OFF 
CLOPP OP OP EEE O SES 
CPA AO PP EOP OOO ES OEE 


Af. AA 
COOOOOECEEE?EO?EL OEE 


COOOOOL?E ALLL LL L/S 
LSP PP FP OOF EA OF. 
r; a 


a yor f- 


John Paul Lona 


50 


System Summary 


The Isen system is a pilot's nightmare, with 
free-roaming comets, gravitational anomalies, 
sudden bursts of solar radiation, forming planets 
and thousands of asteroid chunks. The lone 
planet, Isen, is anew gas giant, with five planetoid 
satellites 


Void Demon Base 


The Void Demon base on Isen IV (the fourth 
planetoid orbiting the gas giant) is designed to be 
hard to find and easy to defend. The difficulty of 
navigating the asteroid belts of the Isen system 
helps protect the base from exploring ships and 
wandering tramp freighters. The base’s com- 
puter systems have a complete log of every indi- 
vidual asteroid and meteor in the system, and are 
constantly updated by miniature mobile sensors 
scattered throughout the system. With this com- 
plex computer network, Void Demon leader Aban 
Ghart can instantaneously call up available safe 


pathways through the asteroid belts. 

Ghart has a complete complement of 
starfighters (all of them “acquired” through his 
exploits over the years). He also has a highly 
modified Corellian Gunship (also acquired 
through questionable means) that is used to 
secure and board vehicles that have been soft- 
ened up by starfighter assaults. 

The base has aseries of tractor beam emplace- 
ments and turbolasers for defense. Ghart real- 
izes that nothing is ever a sure bet, and has built 
several entrances into the Morvak caves beneath 
the base. Only he and a few of his most trusted 
thugs know the route through the caves to an 
escape cruiser hidden a few kilometers away. 


Starfighter Complement 


3 Z-95 Mark I Headhunters 


A true museum piece, the Z-95 Mark I (or, Z- 
95Mk1) was the first version of the legendary 
starfighter. It used a primitive sweep-wing design 


Navigating the Belt 


The Isen system is so dangerous that ships 
entering the outer limits of the system must make 
Moderate starship piloting rolls every minute to 
avoid hitting the hurtling balls of rock and ice. After 
five minutes of flying time (assuming two speed 
actions per round), the characters will enter the 
heart of system. 

Now the characters must make a new starship 
piloting roll every round to avoid hitting an asteroid. 
Roll one die on the first chart (“Piloting Difficulty”) to 
determine the piloting difficulty. If the characters 
ever exceed the difficulty by two levels, they have 
discovered the pirates’ path through the asteroid 
belt, which requires only a Very Easy starship piloting 
roll every round. 

Characters may choose to leave the asteroid 
belts but they still must navigate a safe path out 
(since the asteroid belt is a swirling mass of debris, 
usable paths will constantly be changing). The 
gamemaster should roll 3D to determine how many 
speed actions will be necessary to leave the belt 
(this assumes the characters are looking for the 
quickest path out — if they specifically state they 
are looking for an EASY path out, then roll 7D for the 
number of speed actions necessary). If taking the 
quickest path, roll on the “Piloting Difficulty” chart 
each round. If taking the safest path out, roll on the 
“Piloting Difficulty” chart each round, but subtract 


two from each roll (the minimum difficulty is al- 
ways Easy). 

Failing any of these starship piloting rolls means 
that the ship has collided with one of the asteroids. 
Asteroids do a varied amount of damage, depend- 
ing upon their size. Roll one die and consult the 
“Asteroid Damage” chart. All damage listings are 
for starfighter scale. 


Piloting Difficulty 
Roll Difficulty Level 
l Easy 
2-4 Moderate 
5 Difficult* 
6 Very Difficult* 


* If the starship piloting total is 40 or higher, the 
characters have discovered the path through the 
asteroid belt. 


Asteroid Damage 


Roll Asteroid Size 
1 Tiny Meteorite 1D 
2 Small Meteorite 2D 
34 Medium Meteorite 3D 
5 
6 


Damage 


Large Meteorite 4D 
Very Large Meteorite 7D 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Isen IV Airless Planetoid 


Type: Satellite 


Temperature: Frigid 
Atmosphere: None 


Hydrosphere: Dry 


Terrain: Artificial tunnels 


Gravity: Light 
Length of Day: Not applicable 


Length of Year: 740 Standard Days 
Sentient Races: Humans, Morvak 
Points of Interest: Void Demons pirate base, various 


destroyed ships, Morvak tunnels 


Starport: Standard Class 
Population: 500 (estimated) 
Government: Pirate Base 
Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: None 

Major Imports: None 


SYSTEM DATA 


Isen 
Star Type: Yellow 


ORBITAL BODIES 
Planet Type 


| Moons | 
|AsteroidBelt | 0 | 
|AsteroidBelt | o| 


kon Forming Gas Giant 
Isen IV (satellite) Airless Planetoid 


|Kossim__| Asteroid Belt (iie 


System Name: 


Star Name: Isen 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


“ Void Demon 
Pirate Base 


Site of 
Escape 
Yacht 


World Summary 


The Isen system is in its birth throes, with a still 
forming star and an endless sea of rock in orbit. 
Imperial survey teams designated four rough orbits 
in the supposition that these areas would eventually 
hold planets. The gas giant of Isen is forming. 

The system is constantly bathed in blasts of radia- 
tion from the new star, and with the asteroid chunks, 
is very dangerous to navigate. 

These factors have made the system the ideal 
location for a pirate base — and so, the Void Demons 
pirate gang, wanted criminals in no less than 15 
sectors within the Outer Rim Territories, have con- 
structed an elaborate hidden base on the planetoid 
Isen IV, fourth in orbit about the forming gas giant. 

Due to the predations of the Void Demons, Isen IV 
has several wrecked ship hulls covering its surface. 
The asteroid is also in the process of being hollowed 
out by an unusual race of “rock eaters” called the 
Morvak— the legacy of one of the ships captured by 
the Void Demons. 


51 


Stephen Crane 


and a bubble cockpit for greater pilot visibility. 
These design features were phased out as more 
advanced technology became available. 


Crew: | 

Passengers: None 

Cargo Capacity: 50 kilograms 
Consumables: One day 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: None 
Sublight Speed: 2D+2 
Maneuverability: 1D 

Hull: 4D 

Weapons: 

Two Triple Blasters (fire linked) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Combined Damage: 3D 

Concussion Missiles 
Fire Control: 1D 
Damage: 7D 

Shields: 1D 


12 Z-95 13 Headhunters 


The Z-95 I3 (“Improved Model 3”) was one of 
the most popular models of this starfighter and 
can be found in service on many worlds. 


Crew: 1 
Passengers: None 
Cargo Capacity: 85 kilograms 
Consumables: One day 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: None 
Sublight Speed: 3D+2 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Hull: 4D 
Weapons: 

Two Triple Blasters (fire linked) 

Fire Control: 1D 


Void Demon Base 


Facilities: 

Personnel: 
47 starfighter pilots 
320 boarding troops 
23 administrative personnel 
140 Droids 

12 starfighter bays 

1 transport bay 

1 landing deck 


36 starfighters (various types) 


Armament: 
Scale: Capitol Ship 
Reinforced Hull: 3D 
Weapons: 
8 Laser Cannons (fire separately) 
Fire Control: 3D 
Damage: 2D 
3 Turbolaser Batteries (fire separately) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Damage: 3D+2 


Combined Damage: 3D 
Concussion Missiles 
Fire Control: 1D 
Damage: 7D 
Shields: 1D 


10 Zebra Starfighters 


A basic and inexpensive starfighter that is 
easy to maintain and pilot. While not very du- 
rable, its weapons are potent. 

Crew: 1 

Passengers: | 

Cargo Capacity: 75 kilograms 

Consumables: One day 

Hyperdrive Multiplier: None 

Sublight Speed: 3D+2 

Maneuverability: 2D 

Hull: 2D 

Weapons: 

Two Laser Cannons (fire linked) 
Fire Control: 1D 
Combined Damage: 5D 


11 Gauntlet Starfighters 


The Gauntlet starfighter wasn’t a resounding 
success when it was introduced several years ago, 
but that was due more to the political climate than 
a lack of engineering excellence. The odd configu- 
ration make for a striking appearance, and it has 
weaponry to back up its bold lines. 


Crew: 2 
Passengers: None 
Cargo Capacity: 85 kilograms 
Consumables: One day 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: None 
Sublight Speed: 3D 
Maneuverability: 2D 
Hull: 3D+2 
Weapons: 
Two Laser Cannons (fire linked) 
Fire Control: 2D 
Combined Damage: 5D 
Two Laser Cannons (fire linked) 
Fire Control: 2D 
Combined Damage: 4D 
Proton Torpedoes 
Fire Control: 2D 
Damage: 8D 
Shields: 1D 


Members of the Void Demons 


Abav Ghart, Void Demon Leader 
Race: Gotal 


Height: 2 meters Sex: Male 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Blaster 5D, dodge 7D, melee 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 


Streetwise 5D, technology 3D 


52 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


ITA 
mn WA 


MECHANICAL 5D* 

Astrogation 6D, repulsorlift op. 6D+1, 

starship gunnery 7D+2, starship piloting 

9D, starship shields 5D+2 

PERCEPTION 5D 

Bargain 6D, command 7D, con 7D+2, search 

7D, split second notice 7D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+1* 

Repulse-hand 3D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Security 3D, starship repair 2D+2 

Cyber Points: 4 

* Abav Ghart has a repulse-hand (does 3D+1 
damage in combat and may be used in place of 
brawling, brawling parry and melee parry), as well 
as a Motion Interface Package, which has im- 
proved his Mechanical attribute. For more infor- 
mation, see pages 41 and 37 of Cracken’s Rebel 
Field Guide. 

Physical Description: Abavis of average height 
and build for a Gotal, but his obvious cybernetic 
enhancements and menacing demeanor are in- 
timidating. He always dresses in expensive, 
brightly-colored clothing, with a complete array 
of weapons at his belt. His trademark is an expen- 
sive gold pendant that he fastens to his belt. 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), blaster rifle 
(5D), vibroblade (STR + 1D+2), comlink 

Background: Ghart has been a pirate for nearly 
five decades, and started the Void Demon gang 
over three decades ago. He is a cold-blooded 
killer. 

Personality: Ghart is a fiend of the worst kind, 
willing to do anything or betray anybody if there 
is profit to be made. He kills mercilessly, unless 
he believes that there is information or wealth to 
be gained by keeping prisoners alive. He will just 
as quickly dispatch a henchman as a helpless 
victim. 


Burnal Terrup, First Assistant 


Race: Devaronian 

Height: 1.6 meters Sex: Male 
DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 4D, dodge 3D 


Lore of the Void Demons 


This gang is wanted in at least 15 differ- 
ent sectors, for piracy, assault, terrorism, 
and murder. No less than 50 different inci- 
dents of hijackings have been attributed to 
the Void Demons, and it is believed that 


their mysterious leader, Abav Ghart, has 
been made a billionaire many times over. 
There is a bounty of 300,000 credits for the 
capture of Ghart (if he is taken alive, the 
sector governments are offering an even 
500,000 credits). 


KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Alien races 5D, cultures 4D, languages 5D+2, 

planetary systems 4D+1, streetwise 4D+2 

MECHANICAL ID 

Starship piloting 2D+1 

PERCEPTION 2D+2 

Command 3D, hide/sneak 3D, search 3D+2 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Physical Description: Terrup has been Ghart’s 
“loyal” assistant for eight years, and makes great 
effort to appear to be completely subservient to 
the pirate. He has a worn, tattered blue and 
orange uniform. 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), comlink, 
datapad 

Background: Terrup was first hired by Ghart 
a decade ago, and due to his subservient nature, 
quickly rose to the top of the organization. He 
would someday like to have complete control of 
the Void Demons. 

Personality: In Ghart’s presence, he grovels 
to the point of being nauseating. He compliments 
Ghart on every decision and ridicules anyone 
that Ghart is trying to dominate. Away from 
Ghart, he is manipulative, and seemingly on the 
verge of psychosis. 


The Broken Hulls 


IsenIV’s surfaceis a veritable spaceship grave- 
yard of crushed hulls. The Demon Void pirates 
have stripped the ships of valuable goods and 
any replacement components they needed for 
their craft. While most of the obviously useful 
gear and cargo has been removed, the charac- 
ters will still be able to access the computer 


Isen IV 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


53 


library data banks, providing opportunities to 
learn of new worlds, valuable lost treasures and 
other items of tremendous value. Some of the 
devices on board theships are still functional, so 
if characters search the ships long enough they 
might find something of worth or use to them. 
Almost all of the ships are trampfreighters or 
bulk freighters. 


Tunnels of Isen IV 


All of the tunnels of Isen IV are the result of the 
incessant tunneling of the Morvak. The interior 


Pe 
ARS 


of the planetoid is completely devoid of atmo- 
sphere, and is chillingly cold. The tunnels are 
about one meter in diameter, and are littered 
with chunks of rock left floating in the zero grav- 
ity environment after the claws of the Morvak 
cleared away debris. Glow rods can only illumi- 
nate a very small radius because of the thick 
debris and the dark coloration of the rock. It is 
foolhardy to attempt to navigate the tunnels 
without complete knowledge of their layout (only 
Abav Ghart knows the paths within the plan- 
etoid). The tunnels wind through the rock at 
many different odd angles, making for a very 
complex three-dimensional maze of caverns. 


Morvak 


The Morvak are unusual creatures that derive 
all of their sustenance from rock. They require 
neither gravity nor atmosphere for survival. They 
have several muscular tentacles that secrete a 
strong acid, which breaks rock down into basic 
components. The tentacles then absorb the re- 
leased oxygen and basic nutrients. 

The creatures have two pairs of limbs for 
movement, as well as two great clawed limbs that 
are used to carved through hardened rock. Their 
bodies and limbs are covered with a bony ex- 
oskeleton, providing armored protection. 

Their tentacles house a sophisticated series 
of organs that generate vibrational echoes. By 
placing their tentacles on rock, Morvak can send 
vibrations into the rock and determine what lies 
beneath the surface layer of rock. If nutrients are 
discovered, they will tunnel into the rock. Most 
areas inhabited by Morvak are riddled with cav- 
erns of every size, direction and angle. 

The Morvak also have a sophisticated means 
of camouflaging themselves: they absorb rock 
coloration into their bodies so that their exoskel- 
etons take on the hue of the rock that they have 
been dining on. Within a few days Morvak are 
able to perfectly blend into the area they inhabit. 


Morvak 


Height: .7-1.3 meters 
DEXTERITY 2D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Mineral detection 4D 
STRENGTH 5D 
Armor: A Morvak’s hard exoskeleton pro- 
vides +1D of protection from attacks. 
Attacks: 

Claws: 6D damage. 

Tentacles: 4D damage 

Note: The tentacles of the Morvak are 
multi-purpose organs. Their primary func- 
tion is to secrete a powerful acid (4D dam- 
age) that breaks hard rock down into oxy- 


gen and component nutrients. These ten- 
tacles are also used to detect the composi- 
tion of rock or other materials — using the 
mineral detection skill, the Morvak can de- 
termine the composition of rock and other 
solid materials up to a depth of 10 meters. 
The Morvak can use these vibrational ech- 
oes to communicate with other members of 


the species, also at a maximum range of 10 
meters. 

Roleplaying Hints: Morvak have an ani- 
mal level of intelligence, but they are adept 
at working with others of their species in 
complex actions. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


=a ST, 
-WA 


ISEN IV DIAGRAM 
Void Demon Pirate Base 


T, 


j aek Cels - = al UT 


Treasure Vaults m 
Life Support : cs 


Command Tower 


Armory 
Supplies 


Launch Bays 


Tractor Beam : 
Projectors | 


x A “ pe 
Tmt 


Main Building 


Member Quarters 
Kitchens 

Lounges 
Mechanicals/Droids 
Library 


If Morvak are ever deprived of nutrients, they 
can place themselves in suspended animation, 
although they will immediately reawaken if their 
vibrational sensors sense an influx of nutrients. 

Morvak are asexual, and young grow in a pouch 
on the underside of the creature. The Morvak 
have several dozen different chromosomes, but 
activate only a portion of them (the activated 
chromosomes are different from individual to 
individual). In this manner, new members of the 
species can be different from their parent, even 
though there is an identical genetic pool. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Control 
Hangar Tower 


Complex 


The Morvak are social creatures that comb 
their caves in packs. The are protective of one 
another and work together to repel invaders and 
perceived threats. Typical means of defense in- 
clude collapsing caves on top of or beneath 
invaders or attacking them outright with their 
acidic tentacles. If an “invader” refuses to fight or 
defend itself, curiosity may overwhelm fear, and 
they may actually attempt to make contact. While 
their needs and motivations are vastly different 
than most other carbon-based life forms, they 
can be quite interesting companions. 


7) 


John Paul Lona 


System Summary 


Joralla, the third planet of the system after 
which it was named, is a tropical paradise filled 
with lush trees, wondrous flowers, and incred- 
ibly varied species of animals; Joralla’s compan- 
ion planets, Manalin and Grall, have poisonous 
atmospheres and no commercial potential. 


Joralla 


The lush tropical rain forests of Joralla tend to 
conceal a topography that is as lovely as it is 
diverse. Huge waterfalls cascade from the tops of 
mountains, pummeling chasms ripped into the 
very bedrock by earthquakes of unimaginable 
power. Plateaus hundreds of kilometers wide are 
dotted with winding rivers and huge forests. 
Imposing mountain chains cover the three main 
continents, with volcanoes mixing in with peaks 
thought long dead. A world of savage beauty, the 
volcanoes and forests overlook the the expan- 
sive, rich oceans of deep blue water. 

The atmosphere of Joralla is perfectly suited 
for oxygen-breathers. Tremendous weather and 
seasonal fluctuations make for abrupt climate 
changes from month to month, with tempera- 
tures varying from a peak of 50 degrees celsius 
(at the height of summer in the equatorial zones) 
to a low of -35 degrees celsius (in the polar 
regions during winter). 


Life Forms of Joralla 


The floraand fauna of Jorallais remarkable for 
its beauty and diversity. The thick jungles are 
home to thousands of different species of trees, 
bushes and ferns. Hidden among the lush and 
colorful plant life are a wide range of insects, 
mammals, birds and reptiles. The cooler forest 
regions are home to many similar species of 
plants and animals. Joralla’s wilderness offers a 
varied and tasty diet to any who are stranded, 
with fruits and vegetables in abundance, and 
many different kinds of wild game. 

Some of the most nutritious fruits on the planet 
are the giant redspars. Nearly a half meter across, 
with a brilliant red skin, these fruits can be found 
all over the planet. Many of best-tasting berries 
come from the tequa bushes, which are barely 50 
centimenters tall, yet whose branches can be 
many meters long. Many plants on Joralla have 
defense mechanisms, such as the brilliant blue 
kewafi flowers, which shoot poison barbs. 


Wulkarsk 


DEXTERITY 3D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Speed Code: 3D 

Scale: Creature 

Size: Adults are 1.5-2 meters long and stand 

up to 1.5 meters tall 
Attacks: 
Claws: 4D damage 

Combat: Wulkarsk eat creatures up to man- 
sized. They attack without mercy and only flee if 
severely injured. They are adept at following prey 
through the jungles, undetected by their targets. 

Using Wulkarsk In The Roleplaying Game: 
Wulkarsk are found in the wild and are used as 
hunters for the Tikiarri. Wild wulkarsk are always 
found alone, prowling the jungles of the planet. If 
being used by the Tikiarri, they hunt in packs, 
and their attack will be followed by the arrival of 
their masters. In any event, they are brutal and 
merciless in combat. 


These six-limbed beasts are well-adapted to 
hunting. These creatures have two distinct torso 
sections: the lower torso has four legs, and pro- 
vides alow center of gravity. The upper torso has 
one pair of clawed limbs, with the neck and head 
at the top of the torso. Each limb has three digits, 
each with a long claw, and a rear claw at the back 
of the foot or base of the wrist. Wulkarsk have 
elongated snouts, with four eyes (two forward 
looking and two backward looking) and elon- 
gated ears set just above the jawbone, but below 
the eyes. The wulkarsk are the largest member of 
the family wulkenso, with several closely related 
animal species also found in the jungles and 
forests of the planet. 


Oslet 


DEXTERITY 1D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Orneriness: 2D 

Speed Code: 4D 

Size: Up to 3 meters tall 

Scale: Creature 

Combat: Oslet are easily frightened and will 
flee rather than fight. They are timid, but easily 
tamed as mounts. 

Using Oslet In The Roleplaying Game: Oslet 
are useful for quick mobility through the jungles 
and forests of Joralla, where repulsor vehicles 
are too bulky to be truly effective. They are loyal 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


es bk 


PLANET 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Joralla Temperate Jungle 


Atmosphere: Type I 


Points of Interest: Wasilsi ruins 
Starport: Landing Field 
Population: 10 million (estimated) 
Government: Unorganized tribes 
Tech Level: Stone 


Major Exports: None 
Major Imports: None 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Joralla 


Star Name: Jaska Star Type: Red Giant 


ORBITAL BODIES 
Planet Type 


Sentient Races: Humans, Tikiarri (N) 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


World Summary 


The planet of Joralla is dominated by tropical 
jungles. The red giant star bathes the planet in crim- 
son light. 

This world is home to an extremely hostile race 
known as the Tikiarri. There has been talk of quaran- 
tining the planet. 

A world of uncommon beauty and peril, Joralla is 
a monument to temptation. For those willing to take 
the risk, there are potentially vast mineral treasures 
to be found, as well as creatures which could com- 
mand high prices on other worlds. The wise explorer 
will attempt to come to some arrangement with the 
Tikiarri to allow safe passage. 


57 


John Paul Lona 


The Collapse of the Wasilsi 


There is ample evidence that Joralla was once a 
world that supported two intelligent races. In addi- 
tion to the Tikiarri, there was a race of humanoids 
called the Wasilsi. The remains of their villages and 
religious temples can be found buried in the soil of 
the world or under plant overgrowth. Many metal 
artifacts, statues of religious figures, and even parch- 
ment scrolls written in a long-dead language have 
been uncovered. They created many works of art 
and used gold and other valuable metals. 

There is little doubt that the Tikiarri and the 
ancient Wasilsi people were enemies for many 
years. Much of the art found on the walls of the 
ruins depicts the great battles of these two civiliza- 
tions. Based on skeletons discovered in early re- 
search missions, it has been determined that the 
Wasilsi were much stronger and apparently more 
intelligent than the Tikiarri. It is considered highly 


unlikely that the bird-creatures hunted their rivals 
into extinction. The question thus remains: what 
happened to them? 

Beyorth Gommdora, a sentientologist with the 
University of Huvveck, suggests that a plague was 
responsible for eliminating the Wasilsi. Gommdora's 
admittedly limited research into the past of Joralla 
(due to the ongoing conflicts with hostile Tikiarri 
tribes) shows little similarity between the struc- 
ture of the Wasilsi and other creatures of the 
planet. He theorizes that the Wasilsi were some- 
how “seeded” on Joralla, either as a colony deliber- 
ately established, or the survivors of a ship that 
was forced to crashland on the planet. Thus they 
may not have had a natural immunity to bacteria or 
viruses to which the Tikiarri were resistant. If this 
theory proves to be correct, it is entirely possible 
that the planet still harbors these germs. 


mounts as long as they aren’t mistreated. 


Another common creature is the herbivorous 
oslet. It too has three pairs of limbs, but also has 
a three sectioned torso for even greater mobility. 
The lowest set of limbs is used for jumping, and 
if necessary, short runs, while the middle and 
upper sets of limbs are used to climb in trees and 
move foliage. The creature eats tree leaves, fruits 
and vines, and makes its nest high in the upper 
limbs of the towering sio trees. It has an elongated 
neck, and a small triangular head, with a long 
snout. The creature can turn its head 360 de- 
grees. They are deep red and brown in color. 


Current Status 


Jorallais seen by most nearby systems, and the 
Imperial Moff of the sector, as a nuisance. It offers 
virtually no economic benefit and seems to be at 
thecenter of constant controversy. Unable to quar- 
antine the system without approval from his supe- 
riors, Moff Debin Seylas has acquisced to the de- 
mands of Joralla’s neighbors, and has posted a 
regular patrol of the system. Ships entering the 
system are warned of the potential danger, while 
ships exiting the system are often searched to see 
if they are transporting any of the bothersome 
Tikiarri. Seylas only wants to do the bare minimum 
to keep the Imperial governors quiet, without de- 
ploying a significant amount of military personnel 
or equipment to this bothersome system. 


Imperial Patrol Craft 


Moff Seylas’ solution to the so-called “Joralla 
Problem” is a pair of Skipray Blastboats, which 
perform regular patrols of the system — nor- 
mally, a blastboat is dispatched once per week 
for a 36-hour rotation. 


While Blastboats aren’t the most powerful 
ships in the fleet, they are normally more than 
enough to contain the independent freighters 
that sometimes visit Joralla. 


Tikiarri 


The Tikiarriareatribally-based avian race whose 
reputation is sufficiently fearsome to keep the faint 
of heart from visiting Joralla. While the Empire 
acknowledges nothreat from thesecreatures, many 
local systems have had unpleasant experiences 
with the Tikiarri, who seem to have no respect for 
the rule of law. Since the Empire has refused to 
consider requests for an official quarantine of the 
planet, neighboring systems have found it difficult 
to control the Tikiarri. On many nearby planets, 
any ship whose crew mentions it has visited Joralla 
is promptly searched for Tikiarri, who are either 
executed or imprisoned, and the ship is forced to 
depart immediately. 

These flying beings can be found throughout 
the jungles of Joralla. The Tikiarri are perfectly 
designed for flight — light, hollow bones, large 
wings, arazor sharp beak and excellent eyesight. 

They are carrior eaters, and have come to rely 
on a predatory animal known as the wulkarsk to 
provide them with food. The Tikiarri breed the 
wulkarsk, both for ferocity and for the ability to 
follow simple commands. The Tikiarri hunt by 
turning loose a group of wulkarsk, then tracking 
their progress while gliding on the air currents. 
Once an animal has been killed by the wulkarsk, 
the Tikiarri swoop down upon the scene and 
feast, often bringing scraps back to the nesting 
area for other members of the tribe. 

The Tikiarri are highly competitive both within 
the tribe and with neighboring clans. Inter-tribal 
warfare is a constant of life. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


-WA 


Tribes are theoretically ruled by the bravest 
and most capable male, but in reality the most 
devious male eliminates all other contenders 
and assumes control of a tribe by default. Tribal 
leaders are extremely fortunate if they survive 
their first year of rule. 

Tikiarri have a natural life span of about 30 
local years, but most males die in combat or 
during hunting by age 20, and most females die 
before age 20 because they are forced to produce 
young as soon as they are able (between eight 
and 10 years of age). 

What makes the Tikiarri especially dangerous 
to visitors is their interest in advanced weap- 
onry. Since a foolish trader introduced the won- 
ders of blaster technology, the avians have spent 
an inordinate amount of time trying to acquire 
more weapons. In fact, “hunts” will often revolve 
around trying to kill off-worlders for their weap- 
onry. Most tribes have at least one or two blaster 
weapons, always held by the tribe’s leader. 


Adventure Idea 


Adriav Kavos, captain of the freighter Jsilia, 
has acquired a vital Alliance data disk. He has 
agreed to meet a buyer on Joralla, where he and 
his crew will receive a small fortune for their 
efforts. The characters have been ordered to 
retrieve the disk, which is hidden inside the 
modified stock of a blaster rifle. 

The Jsilia made its way to the Joralla system 
free of incident, and the characters’ orders indi- 
cate that they have less than one day to recap- 
ture the data disk. The following is atimetable for 
various events in this adventure: the implica- 
tions and responses to these events will have to 
taken into account by the gamemaster. All times 
are “local” for the landing site of the Jsilia. 


¢ Late Afternoon: The characters’ ship arrives in 
system. First priority is discovering the location 


Tikiarri 

Height: 1.75 meters 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
STRENGTH 1D 
TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Roleplaying Hints: The Tikiarri are ag- 
gressive and combative, completely lack- 
ing honor and mercy. More often than not, 
the Tikiarri will back down from a confron- 
tation, only to send their wulkarsk after the 
offending individual at a later time. 

Quote: “Watch how our brother’s feath- 
ers burn in the night.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


of the /silia— perhaps the characters were smart 
enough to check with their contacts before start- 
ing out on this adventure. If not, they will have to 
use a sensor sweep (and during the minutes they 
will have to stay in orbit, itis highly likely that the 
Isilia will detect them). The Jsilia has landed ina 
clearing adjacent to a Wasilsi temple. They may 
opt to pose as independent traders, making a 
“friendly call on fellow traders before meeting 
the locals.” The crew of the Jsilia may actually be 
friendly upon first encounter. 


* Late Evening: A nearby and highly aggressive 
Tikiarri tribe attacks (either the Jsilia, the charac- 
ters’ ship, or both). They are trying to capture the 
blasters of the various “invaders.” If they are quite 
successful, they may overrun whoever is holding 
the data disk and capture the modified blaster rifle 
in which the disk is hidden. The strength of the 
attacking force and their persistence should be 
modified according to the skill of the characters, 
whether or not they will actually be involved in the 
combat or beobservers, and whether itis desireable 
for the Tikiarri to capture the data disk. 


¢ Early Morning: The buyer of the data disk ar- 
rives, with a full complement of gun-toting “assis- 
tants.” What the characters don’t know is that heis 
actually an Imperial spy who will not only take the 
data disk, but has called both Skipray Blastboats 


Joralla 


60 


one Kr al Cete CINE ie EN ae Pe Ee 
_ JORALLA DIAGRAM 


aes ae ate 


into the system to capture the Jsilia. 


Naturally, this pattern of events will probably 
wreak havoc with the characters’ plans. This is 
as it should be. The point of this adventure is to 
reinforce the notion that everyone, the crew of 
the J/silia, the characters, the Tikiarri, even the 
Imperial spies, are playing pieces in a deadly 
game for the fate of the galaxy. 


Personalities For Adventuring 


Adriav Kavos, 
captain of the freighter Isilia 


Race: Human 

Height: 1.6 meters Sex: Male 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 

Blaster 4D+1, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 

Bureaucracy 4D+2, cultures 3D+2, languages 
5D, planetary systems 4D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D+2 

Astrogation 4D+2, starship piloting 6D 
PERCEPTION 3D 

Bargain 5D, command 3D+2, con 4D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 3D+1 

Demolition 4D, starship repair 5D+2 


FS = in 
Borges FERN, ee aCe ECE BO 


Sane 


Description: Kavos appears much older than 
his true age — years of trying to pay his bills ina 
very dangerous and competitive business have 
caught up with him. 

Objectives: Kavos desperately seeks that “one 
big one” that will allow him to pay off his bills and 
retire in style, or at least keep a steady stream of 
liquor. 

Background: Kavos has been running the star 
lanes for years. He’s never been too successful, 
but hasn’t ever done poorly enough to leaving 
the profession. He is a wanderer by nature, lack- 
ing direction in business and life in general. 

He got the data disk by having his crew take out 
some “suspicious looking” tramp freighter crew 
members in a spaceport on the other side of the 
sector. They turned out to be Rebels, and he 
realized that the disk he stole was worth a fortune. 

Personality: Likeable enough, but not too 
bright, trustworthy or talented. He is obsessed 
with getting the deal on this data disk done —and 
doesn't see the simpletrap he is about to fall into. 
He has no respect for the Empire, but doesn't 
care for the Alliance’s cause either. 

Quote: “It doesn’t matter who’s paying, as 
long as I’m paid.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Joralla 


The Crew of the Isilia 


Gezzov-tak 


Race: Arcona 

Height: 1.6 meters Sex: Male 
DEXTERITY 2D+1 

Blaster 3D+2, dodge 4D, melee 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+1 
Streetwise 3D 

MECHANICAL 1D+2 
PERCEPTION 2D+1 
Hide/sneak 4D, search 5D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
TECHNICAL 1D+2 


Nabkess 


Race: Ortolan 

Height: 1.5 meters Sex: Female 
DEXTERITY 1D+2 

Blaster 3D, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

Starship gunnery 3D 
PERCEPTION 2D+1 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Computer prog/repair 4D, starship repair 5D 


Segken Tels 


Race: Quarren 

Height: 1.7 meters Sex: Female 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 3D, dodge 3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Starship gunnery 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D+1 
Bargain 4D, con 4D+2 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 1D+2 


The Isilia 


Craft: The Isilia 
Type: Modified Freighter 
Scale: Starfighter 
Crew: 2 
Passengers: 4 
Cargo Capacity: 100 metric tons, 40 cubic 
meters 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x3 
Sublight Speed: 2D 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Hull: 4D 
Weapons: 
Two Laser Cannons (fire separately) 
Fire Control: 2D 
Damage: 2D 
Shields: 1D 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


61 


System Summary 


The Killaniri system is an important part of the 
Empire, and sports both a gas giant rich with 
prothium blaster gas (Killaniri) and a world with 
its own sentient race (Mutanda). It is a valuable 
trade system with much wealth, but little politi- 
cal influence. 

Killaniri is controlled by outside forces. The 
great weapons corporations, led by BlasTech 
and Czerka, have complete control over the gas 
mining on Killaniri. Therefore, faceless bureau- 
crats many systems away make all of the deci- 
sions regarding the development, management 
and growth of the system. 

As far as Mutanda and Justa are concerned, 
everyone on these facilities is either in the em- 
ploy of the weapons corporations, or providing 
products and services for these people. 

The sentient Horansi of Mutanda have found it 
more desirable to retain a primitive and war-like 
lifestyle. They don’t seem to desire uniting their 
people, and instead are fractionalized and ma- 
nipulated by petty criminals, the great corpora- 
tions, poachers, and untrustworthy, but power- 
ful tribal leaders. It seems that Mutanda will 
simply remain another petty system under the 
iron grip of the Empire. 


Killaniri 


BlasTech Corporation's prothium refining sta- 
tion floats 40,000 kilometers up from the swirling 
green, yellow and orange clouds of Killaniri. The 
planet itself is 154,000 kilometers in diameter, 
with an atmosphere mixture of prothium, rethen 
and ammonia compounds. Incredible storms 
sweep the thick atmosphere, constantly churn- 
ing the volatile gasses of Killaniri. 

Into this mixture fly the gas collectors of 
BlasTech. Controlled remotely from the space 
station, and kept in check by Droids, the gas 
collectors are larger than most tramp freighters. 
Plunging through the atmosphere, the various 
gasses of Killaniri are passed through huge filters 
and processing stations, extracting only the 
prothium. 

The prothium is further processed into usable 
blaster gas at the refining station, as it is passed 
through a complex series of filters and pressure 
chambers containing pure rethen. 

The economic worth of the system, and the 
Empire's desire to prevent marauders and Alli- 
ance forces from acquiring large amounts of 
blaster gas, has resulted in a permanent and 


impressive Imperial presence in the system. The 
Escort Carrier Terrup and the Dreadnaught-class 
Heavy Cruiser Disorver are stationed on perma- 
nent patrol’in this system. There are also two 
Imperial Customs Corvettes for regular patrol 
duty. They are serviced by a small Imperial base 
on the moon of Justa (about ten kilometers from 
the starport), which has a troop complement of 
600. An additional 600 troops have been sta- 
tioned aboard Justa starport for customs and law 
enforcement purposes. This is in addition to the 
Corporate Enforcers employed by the compa- 
nies 


Justa Starport 


The Justa starport is a great subterranean 
complex, with surface-level docking facilities for 
up to 50 light freighters. Larger bulk transports 
are assigned orbits around the satellite. Jointly 
owned by BlasTech Corporation, Czerka Weap- 
ons and Blethern Gas Industries, this is truly a 
corporate facility. All of the personnel are depen- 
dent upon the corporations and the prothium 
refining stations for their livelihood. Ships not 
owned by these corporations are charge exorbi- 
tant fees for the services the starport provides 
(about 200 percent of standard costs). 

However, there is also a great deal of opportu- 
nity aboard the starport, which is a bustling 
trade city. The companies generally ignore ille- 
gal activities if they are handled with tact and 
secrecy, and the station has become a haven for 
mercenaries. Many Horansi have come to the 
station and can be hired out as scouts, or can be 
very useful in opening up trade with Horansi 
tribes on the surface of Mutanda. A great deal of 
trade is also geared to the many hunting expedi- 
tions that come to Mutanda, since most of these 
tourists have a great deal of disposable income. 


Mutanda 


Mutanda, like the Killaniri system, has been 
part of the galactic community for hundreds of 
years. Primarily, Mutanda is just a planet for 
exotic hunting vacations and it is easily acces- 
sible because of the spaceport on the satellite of 
Justa. 

Mutandais primarily atemperate plains planet, 
with wild, open grassland, dotted with copses of 
trees. The planet is generally warm and arid, with 
light gravity, few rains and a light but breathable 
atmosphere (Type I). The arid plains have few 
rains (primarily at the onset of the cooler winter 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Planet Name 
Mutanda 

Type: Terrestrial 

Temperature: Temperate 

Atmosphere: Type | 

Hydrosphere: Moist 

Gravity: Light 

Terrain: Ocean, plains, hill/forest, forest, jungle 

Length of Day: 18 Hours 

Length of Year: 267 Local Days 

Sentient Races: Horansi (N), Humans 

Moons: Mortav, Justa, Seldibia, Mutar-Horan 

Points of Interest: Spaceport on Justa; prothium gas 

mining operations (Killaniri) 


Planet Type 
Temperate Plains 


Starport: Standard class (Justa) 

Population: 120 million 

Government: Individual tribes 

Tech Level: Feudal/industrial 

Major Exports: Illegally poached animals 

Major Imports: Mid technology, foodstuffs, luxury goods 


SYSTEM DATA 


Killaniri 


System Name: 


Yellow 


Killaniri Star Type: 
ORBITAL BODIES 
Planet Type 


Star Name: 


Temperate Plains 


Killaniri Gas Giant 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


World Summary 


The Killaniri system is one of the largest suppliers 
of prothium blaster gas to the Empire. 

Because of the vast economic worth of Killaniri, 
the plains world of Mutanda stands ready for star- 
tling economic growth. Mutanda’s second satellite, 
Justa, has the only sizeable starport of the system. As 
such, many workers and goods pass through the 
corridors of the vast starport, purchasing the wares 
and services of the Horansi traders. 

Mutanda is a rolling land of grasslands, jungles, 
and natural wonders. The sentient race, the Horansi, 
are actually divided into four distinct subspecies. In 
addition to the Horansi, the world has many different 
species of big game animals, resulting in a booming 
legalized safari trade. However, the encroachments 
of poachers may result in the extinction of many 
species of Mutandan wildlife. 


63 


Stephen Crane 


season), and are often under drought conditions. 
The rare streams, rivers and watering holes are 
areas of prime contention amongst rival Horansi 
tribes and wild animal herds. The mountain and 
forest regions see much morerain, also primarily 
during winter, but they are still quite dry and 
water is a precious commodity. 

Many “common” species of the galaxy are also 
found on Mutanda. Several species grow to larger 
than typical sizes on this world, and invariably, 
all of the species are aggressive and dangerous 
— Mutandais a harsh world with no room for the 
weak. 


Animals 


The great game animals of Mutanda are fa- 
mous throughout the sector because of their 
ferocity and cunning. The difficult conditions of 
the world have bred hardy and crafty creatures 
that know how to blend into the natural terrain 
and escape pursuit. 

Because of the explosive growth of hunting as 
an industry, the Gorvan Horansi have begun 
issuing hunting permits to visitors (the basic fee 
is 100 credits per hunter per day). These permits 
are honored by the Empire (especially since the 
corporations owning Justa starport and the Im- 
perial governor receive a huge share of the per- 
mit fees). On the planet, anyone caught hunting 
without a permit is subject to huge fines (up- 
wards of 10,000 credits) and imprisonment. On 
Mutanda, the Gorvan spend a great deal of time 
hunting down poachers, although the other 
Horansi races harass licensed hunters since the 
Gorvan permits allow the hunting of other sub- 
species. The following are some of the more 
prominent game animals on the world. 


Kalan 


DEXTERITY 4D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

STRENGTH 2D+1 

Speed Code: 5D 

Size: Up to 3.4 meters tall at the shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Tusks: 4D+1 damage 
Trample: 4D+2 damage 

Combat: Kalans always work in a group, with 
a small number of individuals trying to trick 
whatever is stalking them. As the predatorcloses 
in for the kill, the other Kalans charge the crea- 
ture with their tusks, hoping to stampede or gore 
the attacker. 

Using Kalans In The Roleplaying Game: Kalans 
are excellent sources of food. However, many 
visitors to Mutanda are lured into thinking they 
are easy marks — not so. 


E y y o 


Standing a full three meters tall, these brown 
and yellow herbivores are found in huge herds 
roaming the grasslands of Mutanda. They have 
four limbs, with elongated bodies, short necks 
and broad heads. They have a pair of large tusks. 
Unlike many species of herbivores, the Kalans 
will not abandon weak members to predators — 
instead, the herd acts as a unit in defending itself 
when attacked, making them a very dangerous 
group indeed. While they are no challenge for 
powerful ranged weapons, they are quite deadly 
in close combat. They are a favorite food of the 
Horansi people. 


Hokami 


DEXTERITY 4D+2 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 5D+1 

Speed Code: 4D 

Size: Up to 1.5 meters tall at the shoulder 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks; 

Claws: 7D+1 to damage 
Teeth: 6D+1 damage 

Combat: Hokami have great skill at snaking 
through the grasses of Mutanda unseen. They 
will attack virtually any size creature, and often 
mistake repulsorlift vehicles for prey. 

Using Hokami In The Roleplaying Game: These 
creatures can be a good “surprise” encounter that 
occurs without warning. Since they have also been 
known to attack Horansi, they can beused as an 
excellent way to break up negotiations or other- 
wise trouble beleaguered characters. 


Hokami are short hunters of the Mutandan 
plains. Their bodies can beupto five meters long, 
but they are only about 1 to 1.5 meters tall. With 
sharp claws and huge teeth, the creatures are 
quite capable of bringing down most animals on 
the plains. They are quite aggressive, and have 
been known to attack repulsorlift vehicles. 


Yeat 


DEXTERITY 3D 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
Speed Code: 6D 
Size: Adults are about 1.5 meters at the 
shoulder. 
Scale: Creature 
Attacks: 
Horns: 3D+1 damage 
Combat: Yeat are normally friendly creatures, 
but on Mutanda they often see an outstretched 
hand as an invitation to attack. 
Using Yeat In The Roleplaying Game: Yeat 
are found near waterholes on the plains, or in the 
nearby mountainous regions of Mutanda. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


RETS 


-WA 


The sharp-horned, omnivorous Yeat have 
evolved into aggressive predators on Mutanda. 
More than a few tourists have moved towards a 
Yeat male, an outstretched hand filled with raw 
grains, only to feel the steely horns of the beast, 
as it leaves the grain behind for fresh meat. Their 
speed is unmatched on Mutanda and their ability 
to change direction through great leaps gives 
them great advantages in the hunt. 

They have four limbs, with thick black and 
brown hair. Short, sturdy and designed for speed, 
they can run through the grasses with amazing 
quickness. They are found only in mated pairs, or 
perhaps with young (litters average three to four 
new pups). 


Horansi 


The Horansi are carnivorous hunters who are 
divided into four distinct sub-species. They share 
some common characteristics. Bipedal, they walk 
on two legs, although they run using all four 
limbs for locomotion. All Horansi are covered 
with thick hair of varying coloration, dependent 
upon subspecies. The Gorvan Horansi have a 
thick mane of hair trailing down the back of their 


Kasa 
Horansi 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


skulls and necks, while the Kasa Horansi have 
thick, striped fur and tufts of hair behind their 
great triangular ears. 

All Horansi have excellent vision in low-light 
conditions, but only the Mashi Horansi are noc- 
turnal. Horansi have an atypical activity cycle, 
with alternating periods of rest and activity, nor- 
mally four to six hours long. 

Horansisub-species can cross breed, but these 
occurrences are rare, primarily due to cultural 
differences. The Gorvan Horansi are an excep- 
tion, and have been known to forcibly take wives 
from other Horansi groups. 


Kasa Horansi, the Striped Masters 


These orange, white, and black-striped beings 
are the most intelligent of the Horansi races. 
They are found predominantly in forest regions. 
They are second in strength only to the Gorvan. 

The Kasa Horansi are brave, noble and trust- 
worthy. They despise the Gorvans for their short- 
sighted nature. Many Kasa can be found through- 
out thestarport on Justa, and a few have even left 
their home system to pursue work elsewhere. 

The Kasa Horansi get along with each other 


Gorvan 
Horansi 


Treka 
Horansi 


Horansi 


Kasa Horansi 


Height: 2.0-2.7 meters 
DEXTERITY 1D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 3D+2 


TECHNICAL 1D 

Roleplaying Hints: The Kasa Horansi 
are curious about the strange galaxy be- 
yond their planet. The Kasa are bound by 
the decisions of the albino tribal leaders, 
and might make powerful allies for the Alli- 
ance. 

Quote: “If it is my skin you have come for, 
itis your death you have found.” 


surprisingly well, and inter-tribal conflicts are 
rare, although they have been known to cross 
into the plains and raid Gorvan settlements. They 
have developed agriculture, low technology 
goods (such as bows and spears), and, through 
the trading actions of their representatives on 
Justa, have purchased some items of high tech- 
nology, such as blasters, medicines and 
repulsorlift vehicles. 

All tribal leaders are albino in coloration. This 
seems to be a tradition that was adopted many 
thousands of years ago, but still holds sway today. 


Gorvan Horansi, the Lords of War 


Through strength of numbers and a war-like 
nature, the golden-maned Gorvan Horansi are 


Gorvan Horansi 


Height: 2.6-3.0 meters 
DEXTERITY 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
STRENGTH 2D+1 
TECHNICAL 1D+2 

Roleplaying Hints: War-like, belligerent, 
deceitful and openly aggressive to almost 
anyone. They dominatethe plains of Mutanda 
and have been able to control the planet and 
theinteractions of off-worlders with the other 
races. 

A Quote: “I know you don’t think my 
price is fair, but it is the only price you will 
get. Now, do we have a deal?” 


the de facto rulers of Mutanda. They actively 
encourage hunting, and they have no qualms 
about hunting other Horansi races. Gorvan 
Horansi are polygamous: a tribe is composed of 
one adult male, all of his wives and all of the 
children. As a Gorvan’s male children reach ma- 
turity, there is a battle to see who will lead the 
tribe. The loser, if he is not killed in the battle, is 
free to leave and establish a new tribe. Many 
Gorvans in recent years have found employment 
at the spaceport on Justa. 

The Gorvan Horansi have purchased many 
more weapons than the Kasa, but have shown no 
interest in the other benefits of technology. 
Through sheer numbers, they are able to control 
the other Horansi races, but they don’t have 
complete control over the situation. Imperial 
representatives have only recognized and ac- 
corded rights to the Gorvan, or specific individu- 
als from other groups if they are “sponsored” by 
a Gorvan. 


Mashi Horansi, the Night Stalkers 


Lone, solitary, sleek, and black, the Mashi 
Horansi stalk the small jungles of Mutanda with 
great cunning. They are the only species of 
Horansi that remains nocturnal like their ances- 
tors, and thus have a great advantage over the 
other Horansi races. They are very quiet and are 
rarely, if ever, seen by any but the most skilled of 
scouts and hunters. They mate once for life and 
themales raise the young. Because of their beauty, 
stealth, and rarity, their skins are the most prized 
of all Horansi. 

Mashi Horansi make use of technology when it 
is convenient, but are still uncomfortable with 
many aspects of it. The Mashi who have moved to 
Justa have adapted well, discovering a natural 
aptitude for many skills. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


NE ee eee Mutanda 
ee. 


-WA 


Mashi Horansi 


Height: 1.5-2.0 meters 
DEXTERITY 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 1D 
Roleplaying Hints: Solitary, superstitious 
and nocturnal, Mashi Horansi are unpredict- 
able. They are the prime target of poachers 
and accept this with a mixture of resignation 
and pride — a Mashi feels if he must be the 
target of hunters, let him take a few with him. 
A Quote: “Let us share a meal in this city. 
Tomorrow! return home, where I cease to be 
a person, but a prize to be hunted.” 


Treka Horansi, the Rock Dwellers 


The best trackers on Mutanda are the short- 
haired Treka Horansi. They are the most peace- 
ful of the tribes, as they are safe from most 
hunters and Horansi wars in the mountain caves 
where they dwell. The Treka Horansi do not 
abide the hunting of other Horansi and will take 
any actions necessary to stop poachers. Male 
and female Treka Horansi share a rough equality 
in regards to leadership and responsibility for 
the tribe and their young. 

The Treka Horansi are the only ones who have 
allowed offworlders to develop portions of their 
world. They are very protective of their hunting 
areas. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are contacted by a Rebel opera- 
tive and told that they must venture to Mutanda 
and capture Sw isi, a Mashi Horansi who had joined 
the Alliance, but has now deserted, taking impor- 
tant data disks with him. The agent says that the 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Treka Horansi 


Height: 2.3-2.6 meters 
D 2D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 1D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
STRENGTH 3D 
TECHNICAL 1D 

Roleplaying Hints: Treka Horansi are 
the most peaceful of the various Horansi 
groups, but they will not tolerate poaching. 
They are curious, and inquisitive, but al- 
ways seem hostile and on edge. They make 
superior scouts. 

A Quote: “I’m sure you wouldn’t con- 
sider poaching in our lands. Being hunted 
down by us isn’t a pleasant death.” 


disks detail an upcoming attack upon an Imperial 
fueling depot, and he fears that the Horansi is going 
to sell it to the Imperial soldiers on Justa. 

The characters have two possible fronts to 
cover: the home village of Sw’isi, or the starport 
on Justa. They may decide to split up, cover only 
one location, or possibly hire some mercenaries 
to hunt down Sw'isi. 

After several days with no luck, they finally get 
a lead which indicates Sw’isi has returned to his 
homeworld, but is actually with an influential 
Treka Horansi tribe. Upon arrival at the tribe, 
they discover the Sw’isi is actually still loyal to 
the Alliance, and returned home to try and rally 
support for the Alliance amongst his native 
Horansi. The “Rebel operative” is actually an 
Imperial agent who knew that Sw’isi was an Alli- 
ance member, but could never actually find him. 
Sw'isi is wanted for several raids conducted on 
Imperial installations throughout the sector. 
Unfortunately, the characters have led the Impe- 
rial agents, and troops, directly to the Alliance 
hero. 


68 


System Summary 


Rordak is the only planet in its system; origi- 
nally, there were three inner worlds, but they 
were all consumed when the star expanded to 
form a red giant. Only Rordak survived. 

Even though that traumatic event occurred 
millions of years ago, the results on Rordak were 
dramatic, as seas were scorched, great tectonic 
shifts occurred, and most life forms were killed. 
Over the next few million years, entirely new 
forms of life evolved, the pinnacle of which are 
the Viska. 

Rordak has been part of galactic society for 
nearly three centuries, and the stories of the 
great “blood-sucking fiends of Rordak” (the Viska) 
are well known throughout the galaxy. The Viska 
have mined their world for precious ores for 
centuries, had advanced to the atomic level tech- 
nology on their own. They quickly embraced 
space technology when their system was first 
visited. The world has been used as a prison 
world for three decades. 


Rordak 


Rordak is a small mountainous world, broken 
and scarred from constant volcanic upheaval. 
Huge mountains and deep gorges scar the planet's 
surface. Water is rare on this world, and rains, 
when they do fall, are highly acidic as a result of 
the constant volcanic ash which is expelled into 
the atmosphere. The world’s carbon dioxide 
heavy atmosphere is extremely fatiguing to most 
new comers. The temperature of the world fluc- 
tuates wildly, with an average of 45 degrees 
celsius during daylight hours, and an average of 


5 degrees celsius at night. Seasonal variations 
can alter the temperatures up to 20 degrees. 

The planet of Rordak is populated by very few 
indigenous species. Plants take the form of 
stunted trees and brown grasses. A few forms of 
grazing animals evolved on the planet, and the 
Viska have learned to feed offthese animals. With 
a constantly expanding. population, the Viska 
must import great amounts of grain and grasses 
to feed the herds. There are few wild animals 
remaining on Rordak, and they are found only in 
the most desolate mountains of the planet. 


Viska Society 


The Viska are ruled by a monarch called a 
caleisk, traditionally chosen when the preceding 
caleisk dies. All of the caleisk’s children must battle 
each other to the death, and the one survivor is 
declared the ruler of the people. The caleisk then 
chooses three to six clans, called /urinn, to preside 
over the various repulsorlift cities found around 
the planet. Each lurinn is ruled by a calsk. 

Each Viska is a member of a clan, either one of 
the lurinn or one of the unempowered calsedra 
clans. Whenever a calsk dies, any of the 
individual's children are eligible to become the 
new leader, once again through combat to the 
death with all siblings. Within a particular clan, 
power is shifted to anew family when a calsk dies 
without any children. Each family selects aleader, 
typically through trial by combat, who must 
battle all other leaders for the right to rule. 

The lives of individual Visk are ruled entirely 
by the clan. The lurinn are granted absolute 
authority over certain calsedra clans. Within a 


A Hazardous Atmosphere 


The high carbon dioxide atmosphere of 
Rordak is extremely dangerous to visitors. 
Several different gases and compounds 
within the atmosphere make “air poison- 
ing” a distinct possibility. Characters act- 
ing without breath masks suffer penalties 
for high levels of activity. A character must 
make a Moderate stamina check after every 


three hours of activity (such as running, or 
hard labor like mining). If a character fails 
any stamina checks, heis thoroughly winded 
and must rest for one minute or suffer a-3D 
penalty to all actions. After resting, the 
character must make an Easy stamina check 


to see if he has contracted “air poisoning.” 
If the check is failed, he will be paralyzed 
from the toxins in the air, and pass into a 
coma for 1D days. At the end of the coma, 
the character must make another Easy 
stamina check, and if this one is failed, the 
character dies. Medpacs may be used to 
counteract the effects of air poisoning — if 
the roll beats an Easy difficulty, the charac- 
ter has been fully healed and immediately 
comes out of the coma with no ill effects. 

Characters with breath masks can act in 
the atmosphere of Rordak with no fear of 
penalties. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


PLANET LOG 


Rordak Desolate Mountains 


pal ee a eee 
eee 
BS 


Major Exports: Metals 
Major Imports: High technology, foodstuffs 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Rordak 
Star Name: Rordak Star Type: Red Giant 


ORBITAL BODIES 


[Name | Planet Type 
[Rordak | Desolate Mountains | o 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


o imperial 
Prison Camp 


World Summary 


Rordak is the site of one of the most notorious 
Imperial penal colonies in the galaxy. The world is 
rich in metals, but the hostile atmosphere, high level 
of geologic activity and the brutal native race known 
as the Viska make the world inhospitable. 

Prisoners assigned to Rordak are either forced to 
workin the dangerous mines or are sold into slavery, 
laboring at the behalf of a Viska noble. Because every 
prisoner on the world has been sentenced to life 
imprisonment, they are considered property of the 
Empire, to be used as the prisons’ wardens see fit. 

The native Viska are a cruel, violent race, but 
because they drink the blood of other creatures, they 
are terrifying as well. Their society is known for its 
callous disrespect of the sanctity of life. 


69 


Stephen Crane 


clan, the calsk has absolute authority over other 
individuals. Assassination and other destabiliz- 
ing methods of altering the power structure are 
regulated through fear — if any individual is 
proven to participate in an effort to kill someone 
of higher rank, he is killed (if the individual is 
within the same family) or the entire family is 
eliminated in an elaborate ritual (if the individual 
tried to cause the death of someone outside his 
immediate family). The caleisk and lurinn have 
absolute authority over investigations into these 
matters. 


Viska Flying Cities 

The Viska live in clusters of repulsorlift pow- 
ered buildings. This tradition came from the 
need to stay away from the ground, or risk being 
caught in a volcanic eruption or earthquake. 
With the advent of modern technology, the Viska 
began building flying platforms, and have now 
adapted to a completely aerial society. 

Alloftheirstructures are huge, open-aired build- 
ings (to accommodate their large wingspans), at- 
tached to a huge repulsor column, which is over 
500 meters long and nearly 100 in diameter. The 
cities are built on several levels, reaching many 
thousands of meters into the air. 

The upper levels of the cities are reserved for 
the royal Viska clans, while the lowliest workers 
and clans are forced to live on the bottom levels. 
The middle section is where most manufacturing 
facilities, trade locations and landing pads are 
located. 


AR. 
ARS 


Imperial Prison Camps 


Rordakis but one ofmany Imperial prison worlds, 
but it is one of the most notorious, ranking with the 
spice mines of Kessel for sheer barbarism. All of 
the prison compounds are built on the ground, 
exposing the prisoners to the risks of earthquakes. 

Each prison warden is allotted responsibility 
over one of the many metals mines on Rordak. 
Forced to labor each day in the dark and danger- 
ous mines of the planet, it is no wonder that few 
prisoners survive their first few months on the 
planet (prisoners aren’t provided with breath 
masks). Since everyone sent to Rordak has been 
given a life sentence, the prisoners themselves 
are considered Imperial property, and may be 
sold into slavery, or used as the warden sees fit. 
They have no rights under Imperial law. 

The men, women and aliens sent to this prison 
camp are the worst the Empire has to offer: mur- 
derers, pirates, smugglers, and “Rebel scum” all 
intermingle in these camps of death. The camps 
are dangerous, as individuals have reached the 
point of desperation — the only thing to look 
forward to is death, and even that will be a relief. 
Violent battles among prisoners are disturbingly 
frequent, but the wardens actually encourage these 
kinds of encounters as a means of keeping the 
prisoners at each others’ throats instead of think- 
ing about rising against the guards. 


Prison Alpha TR-8 


The layout and personnel of prison Al- 
pha TR-8 are presented as a typical facility 
on Rordak. The layout can be used for other 
Imperial prison facilities on other worlds as 
well. 

Alpha TR-8 is a camp housing 5,452 pris- 
oners (maximum capacity), with 150 full- 
time guards and hundreds of service Droids. 
Located just 500 meters from a barthierum 
mine, the prisoners daily routine begins at 
0400 hours (local time). Each prisoner is to 
rise, shower and eat breakfast, and be in 
their mining groups by 0530. With ten min- 
utes to walk (always under the darkened 
skies of Rordak), the prisoners work one 
continuous shift until 0700 (lunch). After 
the one hour break, they resume work until 
1100 hours, at which point they must return 
to the camp for their rest period. 

The camp itself is ringed with guard tow- 
ers (20 meters tall, with spotlights), infra- 
red scanners (Difficult sneak roll to by- 
pass), proton mines (8D damage) and slicer 
energy fields (20 meters long, doing 6D 
damage. Escape is theoretically possible, 
but Alpha TR-8 has a perfect record. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


i Aaaama 


-WA 


The insidious nature of the Imperial system 
blots out hope and kindness. “Privileged” prison- 
ers are often selected to lead other teams of less 
experienced prisoners and are allowed to use 
whatever means necessary to meet their quotas. 
All of the prisoners are under the constant vigi- 
lanceof the prison guards, who insure that every- 
one receives a fair serving of abuse. 

Prisoners who refuse to cooperate are seldom 
executed immediately. Instead they are sold to 
the Viska clans (many end up as vessels for Viska 
feedings). 


Major Drummond, Warden, 
Alpha TR-8 

Template Type: Security Warden 

Race: Human 

Height: 1.75 meters Sex: Male 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 4D, brawling parry 4D, dodge 4D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 

Bureaucracy 3D+1, languages 3D+1, 

streetwise 4D+1 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Repulsorlift Op. 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 2D+2 

Bargain 3D+2, command 4D+2, hide/sneak 

3D, search 5D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Brawling 4D+1, climbing/jumping 3D+2, 

stamina 4D 

TECHNICAL 2D+1 

Computer programming/repair 3D+1,demo- 

litions 3D+1, security 4D+1 

Description: Major Drummond is a thin man 
with acoldly cruel smile. He has thinning grey hair. 

Objectives: To mine as much ore as he can so 
that he receives a large bonus from the Empire. 

Background: Drummond began his career as a 
security guard at the political detention wards of 
Chromovon. After several years of meritorious 
service, he was assigned to Rordak, where he 
quickly worked his way to the warden’s position at 
prison Alpha TR-8. 

Personality: Cold, ruthless, and cruel, 
Drummond cares nothing for his prisoners, or 
even his guards. He cares only for the money that 
his job brings and the cruelty he can inflict on 
others. He has been known to take a personal 
hand is disciplining especially troublesome pris- 
oners. 

Equipment: Comlink, blaster pistol (damage 
4D), stun truncheon (stun damage 4D+1), 
vibroblade (damage STR +1D+2), interrogator kit 
on belt. 

Quote: “It won’t be long now. I can see my 
Viska friends on the horizon. Do you think they'll 
want you as a slave or a meal?” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Detention Guard 


DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster 3D, brawling parry 2D+2, melee parry 

2D+2, melee 3D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D 

Alien races 3D, streetwise 2D+2 

MECHANICAL 2D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

Bargain 3D, con 2D+2, command 3D, search 

3D 

STRENGTH 2D 

Brawling 3D+1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Security 3D+2 

Equipment: blaster rifle (damage 5D), force 
pike (damage 4D), breath mask (Type 22), 
comlink. 

A Quote: “Hurry up now, we haven't got all 
day. Move before I have one of your pals crush 
your skull.” 


Orbital Nightcloaks 


The Empire has used a most effective means of 
psychological torture to keep order in the prison 
camps. Above each campis an orbital nightcloak, 
which blocks all sunlight. The camps are im- 
mersed in one continuous night, and the prison- 
ers are privy only to the constant whistling winds 
from the mountains. For more information see 
page 68 of The Imperial Sourcebook. 


Viska 


Viska are flying carnivores native to the deso- 
late world of Rordak. When fully grown, their 
bodies are between two and three meters long, 
with a wing span of nearly five meters. They have 
two large wings, as well as two appendages at the 
base of the torso. The smaller appendages can 
manipulate tools, and they have quickly adapted 
to the use of Imperial technology. 

The Viska have long necks, topped by a trian- 
gular head. Their eyes are placed well back on 
the skull, so they have a complete arc of vision, 
including directly behind them. They derive 
nearly all of their sustenance from the blood of 
other living creatures due to a very primitive 
digestive tract. Their circular mouths house a 
proboscis called a blossug. It is about 40 centime- 
ters long, with several layers of muscle, and a 
hollow bone with a jagged tip in the center. When 
a Viska feeds, it extends the blossug, cutting into 
the flesh ofacreature. Through use of the muscles 
in the snout and a secondary group of muscles 
beneath the skull, the creature withdraws blood 
from the unfortunate victim. 

The blood is passed through several small 
organs that extract oxygen and processed nutri- 
ents. Because of their biology, the Viska are 


unable to eat meats or plant life. The Viska are 
able to absorb the most nutrition from creatures 
native to their world, including kessarch and 
drivveb, two kinds of grazing herd animals. A full 
grown Viska must drink about one gallon of blood 
per day. For creatures not native to Rordak, a 
Viska must drink nearly a gallon and a half of 
blood and the unusual chemical compounds in 
the blood stream cause 1D damage (these dam- 
age dice are cumulative if the creature has to 
drink from aliens more than one day in a row). 
Viska will not feed off one another, although they 
will sometimes usea proboscis attack as ameans 
of establishing authority over other Viska. 

The Viska have excellent infrared spectrum vi- 
sion, allowing them to operate in complete dark- 
ness with no penalties. 

Viska expend a great deal of energy, and must 
rest for eight hours per local day. 

Individual Viska are controlled by their clan, 
and as such, they constantly seek ways to increase 
their personal status and the status of their clan. 
Few Viska have ever attempted to leave their na- 
tive society; those that did escape had to flee elite 
Viska warriors and hired bounty hunters. 

The Viska society is ruled by sheer power 
alone, so few Viska choose their profession as 
much as a leader assigns them to a task or 


Fy 
ARST 


occupation. While they take great pride in per- 
forming their job well, they also always have an 
unspoken agenda of moving into positions of 
more wealth, influence and comfort. 


Adventure Idea 


This adventure hook is dependent upon the 
characters feeling a moral obligation to go upon 
a suicide rescue mission: perhaps a high ranking 
informant or officer has been captured and sent 
to Rordak. Another option is to have a good 
friend or even a relative of one of the characters 
be sent to Rordak for some crime committed 
against the Empire (maybe even the fact that 
they associate with known Rebel sympathizers 
— the characters in question). 

The characters can come to the world posing as 
traders or businessmen who would like to pur- 
chase some of the items produced by the Viska 
factories or some of the metal ores hauled out of 
the mines. If they choose this option, they will have 
to either come up with an excuse to enter the 
prison (such as taking a tour of the mines) or try to 
sneak through the prison’s elaborate defenses. 

If the prison alarms are tripped, the entire 
prison will turn out to see what disturbance has 
occurred. Naturally the characters may be able 
to create enough noise and confusion (i.e. explo- 
sions) to prevent the guards from discovering 
what is going on. Once the characters enter the 
prison, they will want to find their friend. How- 
ever, they will also face a riot since the prisoners 
feel that now is time to take whatever advantage 
one can — some prisoners try to escape, others 
want to settle grudges “once and for all,” still 


Viska 
Height: 2-3 meters long 


DEXTERITY 3D PERCEPTION 3D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D STRENGTH 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D TECHNICAL 1D 


Special Attack: The blossug attack causes 
4D damage when it first strikes a creature. 
For every minute that the creature is drained 
of blood, roll 3D damage. 


Roleplaying Hints: The Viska are a race 
that frightens many other sentient crea- 
tures. They callously dismiss many notions 
about decency and honor. They are willing 
to betray anyone for personal advancement, 
do not respect agreements and allegiances, 
and typically regard most beings as little 
more than a prospective meal. 

Quote: “A new vessel for my amuse- 
ment. Now, hurry and fetch a kessarch be- 
fore I use you as a meal.” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


— T. 
-WA 


others will try to take down prison guards to get 
their weaponry. Others, driven insane by months 
of inhumane treatment, will be entirely unpre- 
dictable. 

A possible option will be that the person the 
characters are trying to rescue is being held 
hostage by some of the other prisoners (perhaps 
even former Rebels who feel betrayed because 
they weren’t rescued). This puts the characters 
in the position of trying to negotiate a deal with 
utter chaos going on all about them. 

Finally, after all of the negotiations and com- 
bat, the characters have to make their way back 
to their ship or some preestablished safe loca- 
tion (perhaps a well-stocked cave in the moun- 
tains). They may also want to try and steal an 
Imperial shuttle or small transport from the land- 
ing field (if there is one available). From there, 
they must use guile and stealth to get off-world, 
since the warden will have alerted all of the Viska 
cities to the identity of the characters. 


Adventure Idea 


In a tramp freighter campaign, the characters 
are hired to bring a load of food to Rordak for the 
Viska herd creatures, the kessarch and drivveb. 


Bes ROP ak 
eee eee a 


While on the planet, they learn the intricacies of 
Viska culture: slavery, deceit, and ritual combat. 
While travelling in the city, they will mistakenly 
offend a Viska noble, who will decide that noth- 
ing less than their complete submission to his 
authority (i.e. selling themselves into slavery) 
will be appropriate compensation for their disre- 
spectful actions. 

The characters must now seek allies amongst 
other Viska clans to avoid being hunted down in 
the city streets while trying to make their way 
back to their ship. In this adventure, they will be 
given ample opportunities to further offend the 
Viska way of life by encountering several human 
slaves (former prisoners) who beg to be rescued. 

This adventure should take full advantage of 
the dangers and wonders of the Viska cities: one 
slip could result in a fall of thousands of meters, 
the darkness of constant night because the city is 
under a nightcloak.( the Viska can see in com- 
plete darkness anyway), the knowledge that most 
of the Viska will view the characters as potential 
meals, the need to sneak about in a city with a 
completely alien architecture and design. All of 
this can help set an exciting tone for this escape- 
type adventure. 


RORDAK DIAGRAM 
Prison Camp Alpha TR-8 


Prison 
Buildings 


Slice Energy 


Fields 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Landing 
Platform 


John Paul Lona 


System Summary 


Veron’s major industry, tourism, has helped 
ward off the harsher aspects of Imperial rule. The 
Gazaran, intelligent gliding reptiles, are among 
the most eager-to-please hosts in the galaxy. 
Gazar cities welcome the tourists with open arms, 
and each visitor is made to feel as if he has 
become a personal friend of every native he 
meets. The Gazaran have proven to bea valuable 
resource for Governor Kie’hintack, who collects 
a sizeable tariff from the tourist trade and berry 
exports. 


The Rainforests 


The tropical rain forests of Veron are known 
for the fevvenor trees, which cover over three- 
quarters of the planet’s land mass (only the 
mountains and shore areas don’t support the 
trees). Reaching a height of nearly 50 meters, the 
trees are merely the crowning feature of a com- 
plex biosphere that supports many unusual life 
forms. 

The rain forests are often graced with short, but 
refreshing rain storms. The planet's low axial tilt 
allows for consistent weather, with seasonal differ- 
ences measured more by rainfall variations that 
extreme temperature change. Temperatures at 
treetop level are warm by human standards (rarely 
does the temperature drop below 35 degrees Cel- 
sius, and more often it hovers around the 40 degree 
mark). Below the tree top level, both rainfall and 
temperature drop off appreciably. At ground level, 
the temperature averages 25 degrees Celsius. Be- 
cause the Gazaran are extremely sensitive to tem- 
perature, and their bodily functions are apprecia- 
bly slowed at the 25 degree mark, they refuse to 
venture near the ground levels of their world. 


Animal Life 


Animal life is plentiful and diverse, with in- 
sects, small herbivores, avians and large preda- 
tors all to be found in the forests. Most higher 
order life forms are reptilian in nature and are 
cold-blooded, although the range of tolerable 
temperature varies greatly depending upon the 
species. Unlike typical reptiles, many creatures 
give birth to live young. A curiosity to several 
biologists that have visited Veron is that many of 
the creatures thrive on surprisingly small 
amounts of food (at least compared to creatures 
of comparable size and activity levels found on 
other worlds). 


Because most of the creatures of Veron are 
highly sensitive to temperature variations, many 
creatures will only be found at a certain altitude 
within the trees. The Gazaran require higher 
temperatures than most other creatures on the 
planet and will be found in the tree top regions. 
Other creatures in the upper trees include small 
avians and foraging reptiles such as the dressto, 
fevvenor toad, and turmil lizard. 

The ground level lifeforms include many of the 
large carnivores of the planet, such as the gwerax- 
hai, black behemoths and swamp worms. Since 
they cannot venture to tree-top level for very long, 
they posea minimal threat to the Gazaran, but they 
have been known to attack careless tourists. 


Gazaran Tree Cities 


Since Gazar have sharp claws that can easily 
penetrate the trunks of the fevvenor trees, they 
never had a need for ladders, ramps or other 
artificial constructions. Instead, a Gazar leaps 
out from a tree trunk, and glides over to other 
tree trunks. 

With the arrival of space travelers, the crea- 
tures learned all they could about other societ- 
ies, taking particular interest in the “extremely 
large family groups” that tended to form with 
advances in technology. Since the Gazaran des- 
perately wanted to join the galactic society, they 
decided to model themselves around more ad- 
vanced races and call their home territories cit- 
ies. 

Each city can have anywhere from about 25 to 
thousands of members, all living and working 
together within a certain radius of the respected 
elder female’s home tree. The largest cities are 
Hengin Ki-Tapp Wett Gon-far (located just to the 
west of Trelbio Spaceport, with over 100,000 
Gazaran), Gazzt So-Terr Aggul Meztim-Si (on the 
continent of Ganzka, with over 50,000 Gazaran), 
Burll-ikem-Tiz-Sah (the largest Gazaran city, with 
350,000 residents), and Distt Dok. Gazaran cities 
have been well adapted to fit the needs of visitors 
lacking the ability to glide. 

Although all non-gliding visitors to Gazaran 
are required to wear repulsor belts at all times, 
ramps and walkways are a very common sight in 
cities, especially near open marketplaces and 
other “public areas.” All sales revenues are split 
between the Gazar merchant and the city’s elder 
female, who distributes the revenue to the rest of 
the city residents as well as the local Imperial 
representatives. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


PLANET LOG 


Planet Name Planet Type 
Veron Temperate Forest 

ype: Terrestrial 

Temperature: Temperate 

Atmosphere: Type I 

Hyrdosphere: Average 

Gravity: Standard 

Terrain: Forests, tropical jungles 

Length of Day: 26 Hours 

Length of Year: 367 Local Days 

Sentient Races: Gazaran (N) 

Points of Interest: Trelbio spaceport, The Broken Trees 
Islands, various Gazaran cities, tourist-oriented 
treasure hunting and exploration tours 


Starport: Stellar Class 

Population: 84 million 

Government: Organized tribes 

Tech Level: Space 

Major Exports: Foodstuffs (fruits, nuts) 
Major Imports: Mid technology 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: Veron 


John Paul Lona 


Star Name: Noveron, Orell | Star Type: Binary Yellows World Summary 

ORBITAL BODIES The Veron system, featuring the tropical rain 

forest world of Veron, is a popular tourist site in the 

Planet Type Mektrun Cluster, with a friendly native race and an 

Sileron Variable Seasonal Nightmare economy driven by the whims of wealthy visitors. 

The world's natural beauty has enraptured visitors 

Veron Temperate Forest er since it was added to the routes of major cruise lines 
Trieron Cool Research Planet nearly four decades ago. 

The Gazaran settlements have a quaint, rustic 
ambiance that appeals to citizens of densely popu- 
lated urban worlds. The cities feature exciting and 
colorful hagglers’ markets, where tourists gleefully 
pay exorbitant prices for charming native wood crafts 
and sculptures. 

Below the Gazaran cities is the underbrush of the 
forests, providing an undisturbed playland for ama- 
teur naturalists. 

Despite a firm military presence, Imperial Gover- 
nor Ferlem Kie’hintack has allowed the Gazaran to 
retain their traditional lifestyle and government. The 
tourist trade has steadily grown even in these days of 
civil unrest, and Kie’hintack and his bureaucrats 
have taken more than their share of the wealth. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 75 


Also near the marketplace areas are businesses 
that cater to tourists who want to explore the 
underbrush. Outdated repulsorcraft are available 
forrent, and several humans and other off-worlders 
are known to hire themselves out as tour guides. 

Although the Gazaran are a peaceful people, 
there is some amount of crime caused by off- 
world thugs and small-time criminals. Imperial 
troops are common in tree cities, although they 
normally are only involved in crime prevention. 


Trelbio Spaceport 


Virtually anyone who comes to Veron arrives 
through Trelbio spaceport. Located on the coasts 
of the continent of Vusl, the sprawling facility 
serves dozens of tramp freighters on a daily basis 
and is a ferry point for tourists coming from space 
cruiseliners parked in orbit. 

The main spaceport, Trelbio Tower, stands 
forty stories tall, and contains luxurious hotels 
and fine restaurants. It is here that visitors will 
first meet the Gazaran traders, who endlessly 
wander the corridors of the building in search of 
customers for their wares and services. 

There are over 30 buildings directly supporting 
Trelbio Tower. Each of these buildings has hotels, 
restaurants, freight merchants, travel agencies, 
and tour guide services. 

The most influential Gazaran city, that of 
Hengin Ki-Tapp Wett Gon-far, has complete con- 
trol over the spaceport, and strictly regulates 
which other cities may do business within the 
spaceport and support buildings. Other families 
must purchase expensive permits to open shops 
and offer guided tours, although the amount of 
revenue brought in by these businesses more 
than offsets the cost of the permits. 

The spaceport has the highest crime rate of 
any location on the planet, chiefly because it is 
the only place where non-Gazaran will be able to 
blend into the crowd. Burglaries and baggage 
thefts are most common. 


Gazaran Technology 


The Gazaran have learned some aspects of in- 
dustry and have mastered the use of steam en- 
gines, powered primarily by wood, wind or rain. 
They are developing small-scale manufacturing, 
such as mass produced crafts for tourists (primi- 
tive glow rods, fire starting kits, climbing gear, 
short-range distress beacons and clothing). They 
also use portable steam engines to assist in engi- 
neering projects. 


Ground Level 
The Gazaran culture doesn’t even acknowledge 
the existence of the world below their tree-top 
cities. They see the area below their homes as an 


Veron ee a), = 


impenetrable dark mist waiting to bring them toan 
early death. The Gazaran have built up an elabo- 
rate and extensive collection of folk tales detailing 
the horrible monsters that lurk below. 

While the Gazaran themselves have no inter- 
est in visiting the “dark lands,” they know that 
tourists love a mystery. Exploring the ground 
level of the world has become a major part of the 
tourist trade, and as always, the Gazaran have 
readily adapted: many young Gazar earn a living 
telling tales of what is below to eager tourists. 


Predators of Veron 


Gwerax-hai 


DEXTERITY 4D 

Hide/sneak 5D 

PERCEPTION 2D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Speed Code: 3D 

Size: 1.5 meters tall at the shoulder, 3.6 

meters long (including tail) 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Tusks: 5D damage 

Combat: Gwerax-hai are large and agile hunters, 
although not particularly fast. They typically hunt 
in small groups, and try to surround their prey by 
quietly climbing through the trees. Once they have 
injured a creature, they will tenaciously track it 
through the forests until it has been killed. 

Using Gwerax-Hai in the Roleplaying Game: 
Gwerax-haiare carnivorous hunters of the ground 
level of Veron. They live in skulks of anywhere 
from fiveto 15 members, with the females charged 
with caring for the young and the males respon- 
sible for hunting. Their brown and green colora- 
tion camouflages them in the forests. 


Gwerax-hai are lean, strong and quick reptiles. 
They have a thin torso, with small heads sitting 
atop a short, squat neck. They have long, curved 
and very sharp tusks, normally .3 to .6 meters long. 
They have a long, very thin tail which helps their 
balance while maneuvering in the trees. 


Black Behemoths 


DEXTERITY 1D+2 
PERCEPTION 1D 
STRENGTH 5D 
Speed Code: 2D 
Size: 2 meters tall at the shoulder, 4 meters 
long. 
Scale: Creature 
Armor: +1D 
Attacks: 
Teeth: 5D+2 damage 
Combat: The black behemoths are dangerous 
hunters whose prime advantage is that they know 
their territory well. Each behemoth has claimed a 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


—ST. 
-WA 


personal territory and has memorized the location 
of every tree, pool of water, and vine. Whilenot fast 
enough to keep pace with most creatures, if often 
feeds after its prey has become entrapped in a 
natural obstacle. 

Using Black Behemoths in the Roleplaying 
Game: These creatures spend a great deal of 
time waiting in ambush. Once a black behemoth 
is aware that food is nearby, it springs to life, 
ready for the hunt. 


Swamp Worms 


DEXTERITY 2D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 3D+1 

Speed Code: 3D (in wet mud only) 

Size: 1.5-4 meters long 

Scale: Creature 

Attacks: 

Teeth: 4D+1 damage 

Poisonous Tail: Tail attack can only be 
used on targets behind the creature. 
Venom causes 4D damage. 

Combat: Swamp worms are experts at moving 
through the thick mud of Veron’s surface. They 
will often bury themselves in a few centimeters of 
mud and wait for a creature to walk by. Once the 
vibrations reach the swamp worm’s soft skin, it 
springs to life, attempting to kill with the stinger 
on the end of its tail. 

Using Swamp Worms in the Roleplaying 
Game: Swamp worms are dangerous simply be- 
cause they are usually not noticed until it is too 
late. They are found in the swamp-like regions of 
the forest floor. Their appetites aren’t large, but 
they are willing to die in defense of their territory. 


The Broken Trees Islands 


The Broken Trees Islands are a chain of is- 
lands in the northern hemisphere. The Gazaran 
believe that the islands are the remnants of a 
large continent which was home to the first great 
Gazaran civilization. For reasons they do not 
understand, one day a great storm swept over 
the continent, destroying many of the trees. After 
several days of the these storms, most of the land 
sank, leaving only the peaks of the mountains. 
Miraculously, some of the Gazaran were able to 
migrate to the other continents. Scientific expe- 
ditions to the islands have found ancient Gazaran 
artifacts in the shallow waters and many tourists 
come to the area for aquatic expeditions. Any 
discovered artifacts are confiscated by the De- 
partment of History and Culture, although the 
tourists responsible for the discovery is given 
fair compensation. Despite this, the smuggling of 
artifacts off-world has becomeacottage industry 
for amateur archaeologists. 


Gazaran 


Veron's consistently warm climate has en- 
couraged the evolution of lifeforms that are cold- 
blooded, The most intelligent are the Gazaran. 
These short herbivores give birth to live young 
and nurse them out of infancy. 

They are short bipedal creatures with several 
layers of scales. They havea very thin membrane 
extending from their ribs, feet and hands, which 
is used to glide among the trees. Specialized 
muscles line the ribs so that they can control the 
shape and angle of portions of the membrane, 
giving them the ability to perform delicate ma- 
neuvers around trees and other obstacles. Their 
bodies are grey or brown in color, and each limb 
is lined with a crest of cartilage. Sharp claws give 
them excellent climbing abilities. 

The Gazaran are herbivores, subsisting on a 
diet of fruits, berries and nuts. Because they are 
cold-blooded, they stay exclusively in the upper 
levels of the trees. 

Females dominate their society for the simple 
reason that they must be pampered for the spe- 
cies to survive. Pregnant females must relocate 
to the highest levels of the trees (the warmest 
areas on the planet) in order to provide optimal 
conditions for the development of their young, 
and the males must constantly protect the fe- 
males from predators. The females are helpless 
for the entire 133 day gestation period. 

Each Gazar city is led by a respected elder 
female (one who has raised at least 12 litters). 
Each Gazar has onename, but the name indicates 
the city, the individual’s status within the city 
and the individual's parents (as a Gazar rises in 


Veron 


| 
i) 


7 T 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


77 


Veron 


78 


status, his name will change). The cities seldom 
engage in open conflict, although each city has 
several traditional rivals. 

Each male is responsible for gathering fruits 
and nuts, as well as protecting the females. With 
the arrival of Imperial technology, many males 


AR. 
ARS 


have also become merchants, educators, engi- 
neers for the steam and wind powered engines, 
tourist guides, workers. Females are primarily 
responsible for bearing and raising young, al- 
though many of them work in the tourist trade as 
well. 


Gazaran 


The Gazaran are extremely superstitious, hav- 
ing a particularly pronounced fear of large crea- 
tures and the dark. Many Gazaran have nervous 
habits like stretching their wing flaps, chewing on 
nearby pieces of wood, and clicking their teeth. 


Sileron 


Sileron, the system's inner world, is very hos- 
tile and tourists are warned not to visit the planet. 
It has an extreme axial tilt, resulting in severe 
seasonal changes. Dangerous storms constantly 
roll across the world’s surface. 

The lifeforms on the world have developed 
accordingly. Plants are very active in the hospi- 
table growing seasons, and must aggressively 
gather enough energy and food for the long win- 
ter season. While there are primitive ferns and 
other simple plants, many have evolved to higher 
order plants, with active defensive systems. Still 
others have become carnivorous, consuming in- 
sects, arachnids and even small amphibians. 

Animal life is aggressive and dangerous. Since 
animals are also required to gather as much food 
as possible before the harsh winter, most ani- 
mals are omnivorous. 

Like the plants, many have venoms and poi- 
sons that they can use on prey. Most of these 
creatures have elaborate defense mechanisms 
as well, such as thick hides, or the ability to 
camouflage themselves in the natural terrain. 


Gazaran 


Height:1.5 meters 

DEXTERITY 2D PERCEPTION 2D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D STRENGTH 2D 
MECHANICAL 2D TECHNICAL 2D 


Fears: A player character Gazar should chose 
something he or she is particularly afraid of (the 
dark, strangers, enclosed areas, the color black, 
etc.). 

Gliding: Gazar can also glide, depending upon 
the gravity of the world they are on. On standard 
gravity worlds, they can glide 15 Meters per speed 
action; on light gravity worlds they can glide 30 
meters per speed action; on heavy gravity worlds 
they can glide 5 meters per speed action. On ex- 
tremely high gravity worlds, they are unable to glide 
(these conditions should be be predetermined by 
the gamemaster; any player with a Gazar should be 
forewarned that the gravity is so high on the world 
that it is likely that attempting to glide will result in 


a spectacular and painful crash landing). 

Temperature Sensitivity: Gazar are very tem- 
perature sensitive. At a temperature of 30 degrees 
Celsius or less, reduce all actions by -1D. At a 
temperature of less than 25 degrees, reduce all 
actions by -2D, by -3D at a temperature of 20 de- 
grees, and by -4D at a temperature of less than 15 
degrees. If a Gazar is ever subjected to a tempera- 
ture of less than 10 degrees Celsius, he will go into 
hibernation (the process takes one hour). If the 
Gazar stays in the cold for longer than 28 standard 
hours, he dies. 

Roleplaying Hints: A Gazar is as superstitious 
as heis curious, astrange combination to role play. 
They absolutely hate dark or enclosed places, and 
know that they have to stay warm or their body’s 
systems will begin to slow down. A Gazar is curious 
about technology, and finds the concept of space 
travel particularly fascinating. 

Quote: “Wheee!” 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


-WA 


VERON DIAGRAM 
Dish-dok 


Gazaran 
Shelters 


Derkolo 


DEXTERITY 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 3D 

Speed Code: 4D 

Size: 1.5 meters long 

Scale: Character 

Armor: +1D 

Attacks: 

Claws: 4D+2 damage 

Combat: These quick and aggressive killers 
hunt larger creatures in packs. Once a large 
creature has been forced out into the open, all 
members of the pack attack the creature, using 
their sharp claws to bring it down. 

Using Derkolo in the Roleplaying Game: 
Derkolo are an example of one of the more com- 
mon predators of Sileron. They are aggressive 
and fearless — individual creatures seem to have 
no fear of death. They must consume large quan- 
tities of food. In the colder seasons they hiber- 
nate in burrows. Some similar species migrate to 
other continents on the warmer side of the world. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


Marketplace 
Platform 


Trieron 


Trieron, the third planet of the system, is a 
cool world of oceans and glaciated continents. 
Aquatic life is plentiful, although land life is rare. 

Several academies and universities, including 
the Academy at Sab Rufo, UnitedChem/SoroSuub 
University and Metharg’s University, have 
oceanographic research bases on this world. 


Adventure Idea 


The Rebel characters are sent to Veron to 
retrieve information from a Rebel agent named 
Gaylan Della. However, Della misses the meeting 
at Trelbio Spaceport, and it is up to the charac- 
ters to investigate his disappearance. They may 
be able to recruit Gazaran to help with the inves- 
tigation, especially if it appears that he was 
harmed near one of the cities on the planet. After 
questioning several individuals, the Rebels will 
discover that Della’s Rebel cell network had been 
compromised by Imperial investigators and they 
must sneak off the world before the characters’ 
allegiance is discovered. 


John Paul Lona 


Atmosphere: 
Hydrosphere: 
Gravity: 
Terrain: 
Length of Day: 
Length of Year: 
Sentient Races: 


SYSTEM DATA 


System Name: 


ORBITAL BODIES 


[Name | Planet Type | Moons | 


80 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Western 
Hemisphere 


World Summary 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume One 


by Grant S. Boucher, Julie Boucher and Bill Smith 


80-page book features: 


e Ten new worlds, with complete informa- 
tion on native sentient species and their 
unusual cultures. 


e Adventure hooks and diagrams so 
gamemasters can use these planets 
immediately. 


e A Planet Generation System, with 
information on creating exciting new 
worlds for the Star Wars galaxy. 


e New villains, equipment, vehicles and 
creatures suitable for use in any Star 
Wars adventure. 


A supplement for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game. 
For ages 12 and up. 


A e- =n a Wan n & West End Games | ISBN 0-87431-121-7 
pe Are ¥ A TGD RR 3 Box 2345 
= - — M —— rr Honesdale, PA 18431 

40050 


®, ™ & © 1991 Lucasfilm, Ltd. 
(LFL). All Rights Reserved. 
Trademarks of LFL used by 
West End Games under 

z authorization. 


0 *"*18874 I 5 


