ENA EFS) 
E m — - — 
a Planets of the Galaxy 

E: .. Volume Three 

A Supr plement foi EUR nit Sta Wars: The Roleplaying Game - 


Elrood Sector — a distant region of space 
caught in the grindstone of Empire against Rebel Alliance! WWE) 


Wal Games : 


=A 


Planets of the Galaxy 


Volume Three 


Design: John Terra * Additional Material: Bill Smith * Development 
and Editing: Greg Farshtey, Bill Smith * Graphics: Cathleen Hunter 
Additional Graphics: Stephen Crane, John Paul Lona 
Cover Art: Lucasfilm, Ltd * Interior Art: Mike Vilardi 


Publisher: Daniel Scott Palter « Associate Publisher/Treasurer: Denise Palter * Associate 
Publisher/Sales Manager: Richard Hawran * Senior Editor: Greg Farshtey * Editors: Bill Smith, 
Ed Stark * Art Director: Stephen Crane * Graphic Artists: Cathleen Hunter, John Paul Lona 
Sales Associate: Bill Olmesdahl * Licensing Manager: Ron Seiden * Warehouse Manager: 
Ed Hill * Accounting: Karen Bayly, Wendy Lord, Kimberly Riccio * Billing: Amy Giacobbe 


Published by 


E 


RR 3 Box 2345 
Honesdale PA 18431 


40072 


$, '* and © 1993 Lucasfilm, Ltd. (LFL). All Rights Reserved. Trademarks of LFL used by West End Games under authorization. 


Introduction 


AR 
ARS 


Welcome to 
Elrood Sector! 


The freighter Blind Luck shuddered out of 
hyperdrive as the sublight engines kicked in. The 
small bridge was bathed in an eerie green glow as 
thenavigational sensors activated and began scan- 
ning the area for known navigational reckoning 
points. 

“Well?” pressed Desric Fol, a burly always-frown- 
ing scout not known for his patience. 

The pilot, a lithe pale Human woman, turned to 
face him long enough to flash him a silent, reprov- 
ing glare and return to her business. The comput- 
ers continued their work. 

Klag, a short blue-skinned Hu- 
manoid who was the ship's navi- 
gator, and chief social powder 
keg diffuser, cleared his throat. “I 
think what Desdemona is ... try- 
ing to convey is that the com- 
puter needs time to accurately 
calculate where we are." 

Desric “harrumphed” and sat 
in an empty chair facing a non- 
operational console. "Most com- 
puters would not only have al- 
ready figured out where we are, 
but would also have highlighted 
likely Imperial interdiction spots, possible trade 
routes, and projected profit margins besides." 


Klag had this 
funny feeling 
that his 


diplomatic skills 
were about to get 
a workout. 


"When you signed on as part of our crew, I had 
no idea that you were also an accomplished com- 
puter expert," Desdemona replied sarcastically. 

"Well, how about that! We know where we are!" 
Klag piped up before the quickly-reddening Desric 
could explode. “Hmmm. The Elrood Sector." 

À young woman dressed in loose fitting white 
robes bounded onto the bridge, a lightsaber se- 
curedtoher belt. “I felt us coming out ofhyperdrive,” 
she explained. “So, where are we?” 

Desdemona reserved a warm smile for Brianna, 
the young Jedi student who 
was also part of the Blind 
Luck's crew. Brianna's opti- 
mism and friendliness were 
the glue that kept this team of 
professional, albeit irritable 
beings together. 

"| was just saying that we 
have arrived in the Elrood 
Sector,” Klagreplied helpfully. 
He, too, liked Brianna and her 
effect on morale. 

“Never heard ofit,” Brianna 
shrugged. 

“Nor have I," Desdemona 
frowned deeply. She turned to Klag in silent ques- 
tion, but the little blue being shook his head. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— T JA ces Introduction 
SS RERO ———— — " 


WA 


“Ihave,” Desric rumbled. "Pretty unremarkable 
place. The locals are stricter than most Imperials, 
and there's not a lot here ... but there are worse 
places to spend your life, I guess ... somewhere." 

Desdemona absently watched a planet come 
into scanner range. "We have a place to land if we 
want to." 

"And whoever is down there is scanning us, 
too," Klag replied. 

Everyone turned to Desric expectantly. The 
scout shrugged, caught off-guard that everyone 
now expected him to suggest the next move. "Well 
... until we know which planet that is ..." he began. 

"This is Elrood Starport Command," a crisp, 
clearly enunciated voice came over the com sys- 
tem. "Incoming vessel, please identify yourself, 
and yourintentions. Use standard protocol, please." 

Desric placed a hand over his face. "Oh no," he 
moaned. "Not Elrood proper!" He took his hand off 
his face and sighed with resignation. "Better fumi- 
gate the ship." 

"We are the Blind Luck, late of Abregado-rae,” 
Klag replied into the com unit. "We request permis- 
sion to land.” 

“Permission granted, Blind Luck,” the voice re- 
plied. “When you land, please observe all standard 
decontamination procedures. If needed, a decon 
team will be sent to your vessel to ensure compli- 
ance. We will need to see your shipping manifest 
and cross-verify it with your actual cargo. You will 
be required to show us your valid pilot’s license 
and ship’s ownership files. Our sensors show that 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


your vessel's sublight drive is emitting an ion trail 
in excess of .54% above the established limit. You 
will haveto have your engines overhauled in order 
to comply with environmental regulations." 

Klag turned the com's volume down. Everyone 
except for Desric stared at each other in amaze- 
ment. Even Brianna looked baffled. 

"Awfully strict, aren't they?" Brianna ventured 
with a sheepish grin. 

“Is this an Imperial world?" Desdemona asked 
Desric. 

"Nominally. The locals bow down to the Em- 
pire, but would like to beindependent." He smiled 
grimly. "The Elrood starport just goes so by the 
book that ...” 

"... And lastly, a trained Counselor will be as- 
signed to talk with you about your ship's name. It 
does not inspire much faith in your competence," 
the voice concluded. "Land at Elrood Starport 
2MZ, Bay 4B. Download code XP-445-T78Y, which 
is being transmitted now, into your ship's com- 
puter upon coming within 50 kilometers of your 
starport destination. When activated, you will be 
linked with our navigation beacon and automated 
landing system. Safe landing, and enjoy your stay." 

Desric was now grinning broadly. "Believe it or 
not, behind all of those rules and regulations is a 
really nice place. Though I hate to admit it, those 
rules may be responsible for the generally peaceful 
nature of the people here. If you can survive the 
post-landing debriefing, you will find the planet 
worth your while." 


“If we survive it,” Desdemona growled. 
Klag had this funny feeling that his diplomatic 
skills were about to get a workout. 


Welcome 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three is the latest 
book to detail the fascinating planets of the Star 
Wars galaxy. However, unlike the previous two 
volumes of new planets, Planets of the Galaxy, 
Volume Three presents the new worlds as part of a 
larger whole. They all exist within the sphere of 
space known as the Elrood Sector, an isolated 
sector far from the heart of the ongoing civil war. 
This supplement provides detailed information on 
the entire sector, including information on impor- 
tant personalities, the history of the sector, and 
likely adventure and campaign themes that can be 
used to help bring the sector to life. 

Elrood Sector is perfect for a campaign locale. 
There is enough going on in this corner of the 
galaxy to keep a group of freedom-fighting, fun- 
loving characters busy for some time. 


Introduction ENE TT ee LSS _a_aS: | = 
————————^—^——————————————— —»! 


ARS 


The information presented herein is set be- 
tween the events of Star Wars: A New Hope and The 
Empire Strikes Back. A robust, strong Empire has 
reached the height of its expansion, and it’s a grim 
time for the Rebel Alliance. 

The first section of this book is a sector sum- 
mary, detailing common features found through- 
out Elrood Sector, including prominent individu- 
als, aliens, Imperial patrols, trade routes, and sec- 
tor history. This section also includes informatoin 
on using Elrood as a campaign setting. 

What follows are detailed examinations of the 
most prominent planets in the sector. These sec- 
tions provide detailed examinations of the cul- 
tures, peoples, sights and events that populate 
these worlds and make them exciting adventure 
locations. 

Allin all, Elrood Sector is a strange and exciting 
place with lots of adventure opportunity. So, drop 
into sublight and be ready to trade, fight, and make 
new friends. 

Elrood awaits! 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


md T JA. The Elrood Campaign 
gS eee eee 


EN The Elrood Campaign 


Elrood Sector has a little bit of everything: 
Rebels, Imperials, pirates, worlds to explore, es- 
pionage, criminal worlds, and much more. It is 
quite possible to have a self-contained campaign 
without the characters ever leaving the sector! 

The people of Elrood Sector have always had 
a strong sense of community that crosses plan- 
etary distances. These beings all feel a common 
kinship as residents of the same region of space, 
and Elrood is a fairly closed community: visitors 
aretreated politely, but they are watched closely. 
Elrood is the sector capital and Coyn is a major 
trade world. Derilyn, oncethe major manufactur- 
ing center of the sector, is now under the Imperial 
martial law, effectively cut off from the rest of the 
sector. 

The occupation of Derilyn has been quite a 
blow to Elrood Sector. The Empire crushed one 
world as a lesson to the rest of the sector's 
planets, and those planets are quick learners. 
Elrood is a sector free of direct Imperial domina- 
tion, but nonetheless an obedient holding of 
Palpatine. 

There are two ways of handling an Elrood 
campaign: the characters either start out as 
Elrood natives, or they travel here from else- 
where. 

There are some tips common to both ap- 
proaches. Keep the two Imperial Star Destroyers 
around for as long as possible; their captains 
should be recurring foes. The captains of the 
other vessels can also be suitable villains. While 
the Imperial Star Destroyers are excellent “per- 
manent" villains, the other Imperial ships are 
defeatable foes (perhaps in the conclusion of the 
first major plot of a campaign). 

Dorok is also a good villain. He is a wily pirate, 
and has not lasted this long by making stupid 
mistakes or by not having a backup plan. Grea the 
bounty hunter can force the characters to keepa 
low profile. Lud Chud or Boss Kaggle can be the 
characters’ recurring hassle (much like Jabba 
the Hutt was Han Solo's adversary). 

An individual's reputation in Elrood Sector is 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


important. Since the sector has an undeserved 
negative reputation, many Roods make it a point 
to foster and increase their own personal reputa- 
tions. Word travels fast in the sector. Characters 
will be held accountable for their actions and 
those who make poor decisions will find it in- 
creasingly difficult to find work — or even appear 
in public. 

Because Elrood is a relatively close-knit sector 
of space, the gamemaster should feel free to add 
modifiers considering a character’s reputation 
in the sector. For example, a gamemaster might 
decide that since no one in Elrood has ever heard 
of the characters, Elrood natives should get a 
+1D when dealing with the characters. The 
gamemaster could add an even bigger modifier if 
she wants to have an “old boys’ network” flavor. 
Examples of this would include intimidation, bar- 
gain, command, persuasion, or any other charac- 
ter interaction skill. Likewise, as the characters 
gain experience and a reputation, modifiers 
should be adjusted. For those who successfully 
complete jobs for the sector’s underworld, they 
should get a bonus when dealing with the likes of 
Boss Kaggle or Lud Chud and suffer a penalty 
when dealing with the self-righteous bureaucrats 
of Elrood. 

Gamemasters should also keep track of the 
characters’ vessel. Ships suffer wear and tear, 
and after one year of intense use in Elrood Sector, 
the newest Corellian stock freighter will get so 
banged upit will make the Millennium Falcon look 
beautiful. Make special notes of ship’s systems 
that have taken the worst punishment — per- 
haps those systems develop chronic problems. 
These problems can be serious or be minor 
nuisances (“The ship always vibrates that way 
when we're about to engage the hyperdrive. We've 
never had a problem ... yet!” or “Sigh ... the nav 
computer just winked out again. Um ... would 
you mind just giving that panela slight kick? With 
the side of your foot, please, not the toe?”) 

As far as Imperial influence goes, the Empire 
officially controls the entire sector, but the only 


sizable presence is on Derilyn. The Empire’s two 
Star Destroyers are based there. Therefore, the 
Empire need not be the major villain in an Elrood 
campaign. However, as the Empire patrols the 
entire sector, Imperial ships or troops can show 
up just about anywhere if the adventure de- 
mands that kind of obstacle. 


For Characters Born 
in Elrood Sector 


While it is overly simplistic to say that every 
being feels exactly the same way about Elrood, 
thesector has a distinctive reputation that should 
be part of the campaign. 

The average person in Elrood Sector comes 
froma working family heritage, and takes pridein 
his or her job, family, and life. While Elrood isn't 
as wealthy or developed as other sections of the 
galaxy, the people here don't desire that kind of 
life. They have made their choice and are happy 
with it, and expect other people to respect that 
choice. They are a friendly, trustworthy people, 
but they are slow to welcome newcomers to the 
fold. 

Of course, there are many who have taken an 
extreme position, and the player characters may 
find themselves in conflict with some of these 
people. What follows are descriptions of some of 
the more common personality types. 


Jealous. Due to their distance from what ev- 
eryone else perceives as "the action," many 
Elroodians feel isolated and ignored. Many have 
an inferiority complex when exposed to non- 
Elroodians, especially those who have credits to 
spare and expensive equipment. They are em- 
barrassed by their isolation and their lack of 
material wealth. 


Superiority Complex. Other Elroodians have 
adopted a belligerent, defensive sense of pride in 
their sector. They see their isolation and lack of 
prosperity as qualities that have made them 
stronger, tougher, and smarter than the “rest of 
the pampered galaxy." To them, Elrood Sector is 
their personal training ground and it has made 
them better beings. 


Defensive. There arethose who point out that 
some planets in the sector do have luxuries and 
ameasure of wealth. These people are very opin- 
ionated and will aggressively correct anyone 
who describes Elrood as a backwater area. Some- 
times, they feel physical violence is needed to 
"pound some sense into those ignorant non- 
Roods." 


Shyster. The final type of personality is the 
"always looking for a credit" attitude. These 
people, tired of being able to afford only medio- 
cre goods and service, are determined to rise 


The Elrood Campaign ——————?O——V P—GA——— — a I DÀ Po 


ARS 


above their surroundings and elevate their sta- 
tion. These people always seem to have some 
sort of “get rich quick” scheme in the works. 
These people are obsessed with status and the 
trappings of wealth. Though this personality type 
includes many honest Roods who want to do 
more than just subsist, it also includes con men, 
swindlers, smugglers, petty larcenists, and other 
unsavory types. 


The Campaigns Goal 


Before deciding how to start the campaign, 
gamemasters and players should discuss what 
sort of goal the characters are working for. Is the 
campaign supposed to introduce the characters 
to the Rebellion, or is this strictly a profit making 
venture? Expectations should be stated up front, 
since it will do no good for the gamemaster to 
concoct an elaborate "Rebels vs. the Empire" 
storyline, only to have the players disappointed, 
having hoped for a "tramp freighters" campaign. 

With the overarching goals mapped out, a 
starting point is needed. A good place to start 
this sort of campaign would be on Elrood proper. 
Elrood comes closest to being a "typical" Star 
Wars planet, with spaceports, high technology, 
interesting locations, Humans, droids, and other 
common elements. Perhaps the characters all 
came to planet Elrood to seek their fortunes. 

Radell Mining is the best opportunity for 
freelance work. If the characters do not have a 
vessel, Radell has several old freighters that 
need alittle work, which can belend-leased to the 
characters with an option to buy. Radell may ask 
the characters to search for new planets (which 
would put them on the right track to find the 
sector's featured unexplored planet). 

For a different flavor, the characters could be 
in debt to a crime boss such as Lud Chud. If a 
character starts out with a ship, this could bethe 
arrangement. The characters may have to work 
off the debt by transporting cargo to isolated or 
restricted ports such as Lanthrym or Derilyn. 
Add to this the usual hazards of Elrood travel 
(Imperials, pirates, and natural hazards) and typi- 
cal crime boss ways of doing business ("My good 
man, I don't care that you were attacked by pirates 
— you left with a cargo and it was never delivered. 
Now, let's discuss a payment schedule ..."), and 
you have an instant campaign goal. 

For an action-packed start, the characters 
could be on Imperial-occupied Derilyn, and they 
must deal with that situation, hopefully making 
an eventual escape. 

An even more extreme situation is to have the 
players create their characters, but start with no 
equipment, ships, or weapons. Stick them on 
Bereaasindentured miners and runthem through 
their escape. Naturally, gamemasters may want 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— T AR ie Elrood Campaign 
Lg —————À 


to warn the players about this different way of 
starting a campaign ahead of time! 

The galactic civil war is not a big topic in the 
sector, so it is likely that the characters know 
little of the war. There is an Imperial presence 
here and the Alliance has several small espio- 
nage cells and listening points, but that is all. 
Gamemasters can bring the war to the charac- 
ters by having a Rebel gamemaster character 
arrive on Elrood, perhaps needing help and turn- 
ing to the characters for aid. Maybe the Rebel is 
being pursued by a small contingent of Imperial 
forces, and thecharacters get accidentally caught 
in the crossfire. 

If that is too abrupt, perhaps the Empire has 
imprisoned a Rebel on Berea, and some Rebel 
representatives hire the characters to take them 
to the mining planet for a rescue mission. 


Running With Unluckies 


Unluckies, as the slang goes, are characters 
who are not from Elrood Sector but are visiting, 
working, or stuck there. This is the best option if 
using already established characters. 

The best gamemaster character for easing the 
player characters into the Elrood Sector is 
Grakkata, the Wookiee pirate. Since the Wookiee 
is very unsympathetic towards the Empire, she 
may be good company for the characters, show- 
ing them the sights of Elrood Sector. Grakkata 
can bea great gamemaster plot device for getting 
the characters out of jams that are not of their 
own doing. However, Grakkata has along memory, 
and she will collect on any debts. 

When first venturing to Elrood Sector, the 
characters will probably first stop at Coyn, the 
"Gateway to Elrood Sector." As the world closest 
to major galactic trade routes, characters will 
have excellent opportunities to pick up informa- 
tion, establish contacts and get caught up in 
other peoples' problems. Coyn by itself is inter- 
esting enough as it is a world ruled by a militaris- 
tic warrior-based species. 

For characters who are traders or smugglers, 
the most readily available opportunity for an 
adventure is to smuggle arms to the resistance 
on Derilyn or to the militia on Torina. This will 
pose plenty of problems since pirates enjoy plun- 
dering such cargo, and the Empire would be 
determined to stop any arms shipments they can 
find, sending the smugglers to Imperial Mining, 
Ltd. (IML) mining camps on Berea. 

For Rebel characters, perhaps the Rebellion 
sent them to Coyn to recruit Coynites for the 
cause. Perhaps they are on a fact-finding survey 
of Elrood Sector to determine the sentiments of 
its people. 

A fact-finding survey would send the charac- 
ters all over the sector, meeting people and 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


visiting most of the interesting locations. Groups 
of Unluckies will attract attention from the na- 
tives and the Empire. The last thing the Empire 
wants is for Rebel spies to come to this lightly 
defended sector and cause trouble. Thus, every 
non-Rood is under suspicion of being a spy. 

If the characters stay long enough, they will 
slowly begin to gain the trust and respect of the 
locals (provided, of course, that the characters 
act in a manner that would make them likable). If 
the characters prove adept at the initial tasks 
given to them, many offers of work will pour in. 


New Discoveries 


This book's last entry, the unexplored planet 
Kuras III, offers a whole world for exploration. 
Elrood is an area of space with many unexplored 
systems, and Kuras lll is just the beginning. Kuras 
IIl offers a unique ecosystem, new forms of intel- 
ligent life and enough adventure and mystery to 
sustain several adventures. 

However, there is no need to stop at just the 
one planet. There are dozens of systems that are 
far off the known trade routes waiting to be 
explored. Some of these systems may have been 
visited once by traders or scouts, others may 
have been the subject of probe flybys, and still 
others may never have been visited before. For 
complete information on running these types of 
campaigns, see Galaxy Guide 8: Scouts. 

To keep things moving along, the gamemaster 
may want to inject a rival into these exploration 
adventures. For example, introduce an explora- 
tion party from IML on a world rich in minerals. 
Obviously, IML will want to claim the planet and 
will go to any lengths to keep that claim. The 
discovery of this planet is sufficient justification 
for the Empire to send one of the Imperial Star 
Destroyers over there to reinforce the claim. 

New worlds should not overly disrupt the 
balance of things in Elrood Sector. Finding plan- 
ets with huge natural deposits or stashes of 
super weapons from a long-dead species will 
upset play balance. If anything particularly valu- 
able appears in Elrood Sector, there will be at 
least three different factions scrambling to get 
their share — completely changing the nature of 
the sector. 


After the Battle of Endor 


Though this product is set during the period 
between Star Wars: A New Hope and The Empire 
Strikes Back, itis easy to adapt this information to 
the New Republic period. 

Elrood becomes a region of open conflict. 
Derilynremains an Imperial stronghold and many 
of the other planets align with the New Republic 
or declare their neutrality. The Star Destroyers 


Thunderflare and Stalker restrict their patrols to 
the Derilyn system and Imperial Interdicted Space. 
Occasionally the huge ships conduct raiding sor- 
ties in other regions of the sector. These raids are 
conducted either for supplies or upon receiving 
word of a particularly vulnerable target that is 
too good to pass up. 

Imperial Interdicted Space is now even more 
aggressively patrolled, as the Sector Moff is de- 
termined to hold on to this possession on behalf 
of the Empire. Even though violators are still 
interned on Berea, many are also destroyed out- 
right once their cargoes have been seized. The 
Empire is through playing games. 

The rivalry between Radell Mining and Impe- 
rial Mining explodes into a corporate war. No one 
in Elrood Sector deals with Imperial Mining, since 
the Empire lacks the power to hold its captive 
market. Fortunately for Imperial Mining, the rest 
of the Empire needs its ores. Ore traffic from IML 
now goes out of Elrood Sector, taking cargoes to 


The Elrood Campaign em———————————— EP Pa 


remaining Imperial worlds. Meanwhile, Imperial 
Mining openly attacks Radell operations. Radell 
manages to survive due to constant business 
from the other corporations of Elrood Sector. 

The New Republic wants to remove the [mpe- 
rials from Derilyn. News of Imperial atrocities on 
Derilyn has fired up Republic worlds in nearby 
sectors and spurred them to action. The New 
Republic is looking for teams to go to Derilyn and 
beginacampaign of sabotage against the Empire, 
scouting for ideal landing sites, arms smuggling 
to resisters, and general nuisance raids. All of 
this is meant to soften up Imperial power as a 
prelude to a New Republic invasion. The type of 
people best used to conduct this harassment 
campaign are player characters (naturally). 

In time, Elrood joins the New Republic, and 
becomes headquarters for New Republic opera- 
tions in the Elrood Sector. Coyn remains neutral, 
but favors the New Republic as theless dishonor- 
able of the two factions. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


WA 


ENS Elrood Sector 
Overview 


Elrood Sector is in a backwater corner of the 
Metharian Nebula Territories region of the Em- 
pire. This sector has moderate wealth, and is for 
the most part beyond the scopeof galactic events. 
Elrood Sector has never been sufficiently profit- 
able or rebellious to merit complete Imperial 
domination, nor is it a particularly tempting tar- 
get for the Rebel Alliance. 

The sector's isolation has discouraged large- 
scaleinvestment by major galactic corporations. 
Instead, the sector's trade depends upon a num- 
ber of small, local companies that conduct trade 
amongst the various worlds of the sector. 

However, the sector isn't totally free of Impe- 
rial influence. To ensure compliance with 
Palpatine's regime, one planet, Derilyn, was 
placed under the yoke of Imperial martial law. 
When the Empire's space fleets arrived in orbit 
around Derilyn, few had any idea what was in 
store for the world. The ensuing carnage was 
excessive, but servedasalessontotherest ofthe 
worlds in the sector: in quick order, the rest of 
Elrood Sector fell into line. 


History 


In the days of the Old Republic, Elrood Sector 
enjoyed better fortunes. In comparison to the 
Core Worlds, Elrood and Derilyn had long been 
minor settlements and not worthy of much atten- 
tion. While the worlds featured abundant natural 
resources, they weren't rich enough to justify 
extensive investment by outside interests. The 
other “major” worlds in the sector, such as Coyn, 
Kidron, and Merisee, were slowly explored and 
colonized by local interests. 

The residents of Elrood Sector's planets, of 
necessity, began developing their own trade 
routes, including the Elrood-Derilyn Trade Route, 
or the "E-D Run." Elrood is at one end of the 
sector, and Derilyn at the other, with the other 
planets as stops along the route. Elrood struggled, 
but survived: it never achieved wealth, but never 
suffered economic collapse. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


When the Empire ascended into dominance, 
Elrood Sector was seen as just another piece of 
unremarkable booty taken from the feeble Re- 
public. The Empire was too enamored ofits more 
choice prizes to pay much attention to Elrood. 

Still, Elrood Sector was not completely ignored 
by the Emperor. Derilyn, the planet closest to the 
bulk of Imperial-controlled space, was seized by 
Imperial forces. The Empire installed a brutal mili- 
tary dictatorship and Derilyn became the main 
naval base for Elrood Sector. As the military sus- 
pected, the subjugation of one world was enough 
to frighten the others into submission. 

Official descriptions notwithstanding, the 
Elroodians began implementing a series of subtle 
anti-imperial acts. The most significant thing 
Elrood did was to slow down trade on the E-D 
Run. Elrood's traders pioneered a run, called the 
Coyn Route, from Coyn to a nearby trade route. 
Now, Derilyn could safely be circumvented. Slowly 
and quietly, traffic to Derilyn was halted, and 
now Torina, last stop before Derilyn, marks the 
end of the Elrood-Derilyn Trade Route. 


The Elrood-Derilyn 
Trade Route 


This is a trade route first established in the 
heyday of the Old Republic. It takes 18 hours (at 
hyperdrive x1) to go from Elrood to Derilyn. 
Coyn, the midpoint of the run, is known as "The 
Gateway to Elrood Sector" because it is the main 
connecting point with othertrade routes running 
throughout the rest of the galaxy. 

With the Imperial crackdown on Derilyn, Torina 
has become the last official stop on the E-D Run. 
This has boosted Torina’s fortunes considerably 
as many refugees from Derilyn have settled on 
this once ignored world. 

While, in theory, the Empire controls the en- 
tire sector, it has thus far bothered to extend full 
control over only one planet: Derilyn. The Em- 
pire has established a region of space encom- 
passing the Derilyn and Berea systems, known as 


Elrood Sector Overview 


NOTES 


* Numbers alongside 
routes represent 
standard hyperspace 
durations (x1). 

* d = days; h = hours. 

KEY 

mmu": lesser known 

routes 

ss 1! restricted access 

routes or trade 
secrets of 
companies 


NOT TO SCALE 


Berea 
System 
(OJ "ean as * 


oe 
ot Tr 


perial- 
Interdicted 
Space 


Li 
INI A 
. "as 


Derilyn 
4 System, 


i System e 


t 
aT 


Kidron 
tan, System 


NG; Tórina System 


^; 
7] 
"niin © — 


Almaran 
System 


Un, 
MIU A 


Stephen Crane 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Rees Elrood Sector Overview 
———————————————— ——————;—s 


WA 


Imperial Interdicted Space. Imperial customs 
ships constantly patrol Derilyn system space 
and the section of the trade route from Torina to 
Derilyn, known as “The Extreme.” Local spacers 
warn visitors that it is extremely unlikely for a 
ship not to be boarded, harassed or confiscated 
by Imperial forces on Derilyn or in Imperial Inter- 
dicted Space. Since the risks of such a run far 
outweigh the benefits, trade from Torina to 
Derilyn has dwindled to a trickle. 

For ships flying The Extreme, roll 2D: on a 2, 3 
or 4 the ship is confronted by an Imperial patrol 
(select from the ships listed under "Imperial 
Forces"). 

The confrontations can occur either when the 
ship emerges from hyperspace, or when the Im- 
perials have placed an asteroid in the hyper- 
space travel lane, forcing the ships to emerge 
into realspace, where they can be boarded and 
searched. 

Other portions of Elrood Sector are regularly 
patrolled, although the chances of confrontation 
are much lower. For ships flying anywhere else 
along the E-D Run, roll 3D: on a 3, one of the 
Imperial ships comes across the ship and the 
captain decides that a cargo inspection or some 
other form of harassment is in order. 


Imperial Forces 


The Empire maintains two Star Destroyers, 
the Thunderflare and the Stalker, and a Bayonet- 
class light cruiser called the Rintonne's Flarne, 
who patrol the whole of Elrood Sector. 

TheEmpire also maintains a handful of smaller 
patrol ships, customs vessels, and Skipray 
Blastboats. There are several TIE wings. The 
Empire has a small armed presence on most of 
the worlds in Elrood Sector, a full military base 
on Derilyn, and an obscure observation post in 
the Tifnyl System. 

The two Star Destroyer captains have devel- 
oped quite a rivalry. Captain Zed, of the Stalker, 
is a hard-nosed navy traditionalist. Captain Pryl, 
of the Thunderflare, is of a younger generation 
and is determined to make a name for herself. 
Captain Zed considers Captain Pryl to be a soft- 
hearted woman who is best used as a supply 
clerk and has no business being a combat officer. 
Captain Pryl thinks Captain Zed is a crude, two- 
dimensional buffoon with no cunning. 

The two captains engage in a continual con- 
test of one-upmanship. Each tries to catch the 
most smugglers, impound the most vessels, de- 
stroy the most Rebels, all in hopes that Sector 
Moff Villis Andal will take notice. Pryl has been 
known to anonymously send out warnings of 
where Zed's ship is patrolling, in hopes of scaring 
away any prey for the Stalker. Moff Andal, far 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


from seeing these actions as means of achieving 
greater rank for either captain, sees this rivalry 
as a source of amusement. Every so often, Moff 
Andal drops a hint to Pryl or Zed about some 
great deed the other did, in hopes of causing the 
other captain to push harder. 


Imperial Star Destroyers: Stalker and 
Thunderflare. Capital, capital ship gunnery 4D+2, 
capital ship piloting 4D«1. Maneuverability 1D, 
space 6, hull 7D, shields 3D. Weapons: 60 
turbolaser batteries (fire control 4D, damage 
5D), 60 ion cannon (fire control 2D+2, damage 
3D), 10 tractor beam projectors (fire control 4D, 
damage 6D). Each ship also has a wing of 72 TIE 
starfighters. 


m Captain Akal Zed 
Type: Star Destroyer Captain (of the Stalker) 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster: blaster pistol 6D, brawling parry 4D, dodge 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Alien species 4D, bureaucracy 4D+2, intimidation 7D, 
languages 4D, law enforcement 5D, planetary systems 5D, 
tactics: capital ships 8D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Astrogation 5D, capital ship piloting 5D, communications 
4D, sensors 3D, starship gunnery 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Command 6D, investigation 5D 
STRENGTH 2D 
Brawling 7D, stamina 6D+2 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Droid programming 4D, security 5D 
Character Points: 14 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Swagger stick, blaster pistol (4D), comlink 


Capsule: Captain Akal Zed is a big, balding, muscu- 
lar man of middle age. He has a thick neck, a 
bulbous nose, hard steel gray eyes, and a perma- 
nent scowl. 

Raised from childhood in a family of strict disci- 
pline and military tradition, Zed has always de- 
voted himself tothe Empire and all it stands for. Zed 
was given his first command after distinguishing 
himself in the Battle of Fleyars IV, where he took 
command of the Carrack-class cruiser Seswennan 
Nightcloak when the ship's captain was fatally 
wounded. Eventually he earned command of the 
Imperial Star Destroyer Stalker. His first assign- 
ment aboard the Stalker was to suppress an upris- 
ing on Valera. While he stopped the uprising, he 
also lost several support vessels due to a funda- 
mentally flawed battle plan. Imperial Command 
transferred him and his vessel to Elrood Sector as 
punishment for his mistake. He desperately wants 
to redeem himself in the eyes of Imperial Com- 
mand. 

A cold, heartless disciplinarian, Zed is a fanatic 
for order. To him, the Empire represents order at its 
best. He, therefore, has complete, unquestioning 
loyalty to the Empire, and demands nothing less 
from his subordinates. His intention is to keep 
Elrood Sector secure and be transferred to a more 
prestigious position. 


Elrood Sector Overview 


12 Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— T AR rood Sector Overview 
ESL. 


WA 


Zed strictly enforces regulations and feels that 
terror and brutality are exceptionally effective ways 
to maintain order. In this way, he is a two-dimen- 
sional thinker. His opinion of Captain Tanda Pryl is 
very low — he sees her as spoiled, weak and incom- 
petent, not worthy of the uniform of the Imperial 


Navy. 


m Captain Tanda Pryl 
Type: Star Destroyer Captain (of the Thunderflare) 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 4D, dodge 5D, melee weapon: knife 3D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 6D«2, bureaucracy 7D, cultures 7D, intimi- 
dation 6D+2, languages 7D+2, law enforcement 7D+1, plan- 
etary systems 7D, tactics: capital ships 8D, willpower 8D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Capital ship shields 4D, communications 6D+2, sensors 


PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 7D, command 7D, investigation 6D+1, persuasion 
7D+2, search 6D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 4D 

Computer programming/repair 6D, first aid 5D, security 
6D 

Special Abilities: 

Force Skills: Control 4D, sense 5D 

Control: Accelerate healing, control pain, remain con- 
scious, resist stun 

Sense: Life detection, life sense, sense Force 

Control and sense: Projective telepathy 

This character is Force-sensitive. 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 5 

Character Points: 14 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Knife (STR+1D), blaster pistol (4D), comlink 


Capsule: Tanda is an attractive woman in her late 
30’s with brilliant cobalt blue eyes. She wears her 
blonde hair in a large braid down her back. 

Growing up in a privileged family taught Tanda 
how to subtly manipulate people, while her father's 
influence gained her entrance to the Naval acad- 
emy. However, she wasn't lacking in ability, as her 
meteoric rise through the ranks of the Imperial 
Navy showed. She is currently captain of the Impe- 
rial Star Destroyer Thunderflare. Tanda was as- 
signed to Elrood Sector two years ago. Her exten- 
sive readings into the Skywalker incident (at least 
those she had clearance for or could get access to 
inother ways) have convinced herthat those people 
who exhibit great manifestations of the Force are 
most likely to be found in remote regions of the 
Empire (of course, this is simply a theory, and 
probably not too accurate, either). She wants to 
find those people so she can mold them into willing 
servants of the Empire. 

Whereas Akal Zed is a brute, Tanda Pryl is a 
devious officer who can seem to be quite reason- 
able. Her mind is always buzzing with several differ- 
ent schemes and machinations. Prylis the sort who 
would be willing to talk things over with characters, 
hopefully to trick, convince, or blackmail them into 
doing her bidding. She considers Zed to be a mad- 
dened rancor: plodding, clumsy and easily out- 
smarted. Pryl has no doubt that she could best Zed 
in a battle of wits. 


Even though Pryl enjoys subtlety and the diplo- 
matic approach, she is willing to use violence and 
torture to achieve her ends. She has a cruel streak, 
and has been reported to take a personal hand in 
torture, even enjoying the pain she inflicts on others. 

Her goals are to be promoted to admiral, and to 
find as many beings gifted in the Force as she can, 
and either turn them to the dark side or eradicate 
them. 


m Rintonne's Flame 
Craft: Sienar Fleet Systems Bayonet-Class 
Type: Light cruiser 
Scale: Capital 
Length: 200 meters 
Skill: Capital ship piloting: Bayonet 
Crew: 120, gunners: 30, skeleton 40/+10 
Crew Skill: Astrogation 5D, capital ship gunnery 4D, 
capital ship piloting 4D- 1, capital ship shields 4D, sensors 
4D+1 
Passengers: 48 (troops) 
Cargo Capacity: 3,500 metric tons 
Consumables: 1 year 
Cost: 5 million credits (new), 2.3 million (used) 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x1 
Hyperdrive Backup: x10 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Maneuverability: 2D 
Space: 8 
Atmosphere: 175; 500 KMH 
Hull: 4D 
Shields: 2D+2 
Sensors: 
Passive: 40/1D 
Scan: 80/3D 
Search: 160/4D 
Focus: 6/3D+2 
Weapons: 
8 Heavy Turbolasers 
Fire Arc: 2 front, 3 left, 3 right 
Crew: 2 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 3-15/35/75 
Atmosphere Range: 6-30/70/150KM 
Damage: 7D 
6 Laser Cannon 
Fire Arc: 2 front, 2 left, 2 right 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 3D 
Space Range: 1-3/12/25 
Atmosphere Range: 2-10/30/60KM 
Damage: 2D 
2 Tractor Beam Projectors 
Fire Arc: 2 front 
Crew: 4 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1-5/15/30 
Atmosphere Range: 2-10/30/60KM 
Damage: 4D 


Capsule: The Rintonne's Flame is an old Bayonet- 
class light cruiser that has seen better days. It is 
undermanned. The captain's name is Dongal Tezrin, 
and he is a very irritable person. The last thing he 
wanted was to be assigned to a do-nothing sector in 
a nearly obsolete ship. Thus, he is always in a bad 
mood, which he takes out on hapless naval crew or, 
more often than not, innocent ships and their crews 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


13 


that are halted and searched. Captain Tezrin enjoys 
interning vessels and taking their crews to Berea. 


m Greetbos 
Craft: Sienar Fleet Systems GAT-12j Skipray 
Type: Defense/Patrol Blastboat 
Scale: Capital 
Length: 25 meters 
Skill: Starfighter piloting: Skipray Blastboat 
Crew: 2 (1 can coordinate); gunners: 2, skeleton 1/+5 
Crew Skill: Astrogation 4D, capital ship gunnery 5D, 
starfighter piloting 5D, starship gunnery 5D+1, starship 
shields 4D+2 
Cargo Capacity: 20 metric tons 
Consumables: 1 month 
Cost: 285,000 credits (new), 150,000 (used) 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Nav Computer: Limited to 4 jumps 
Maneuverability: 1D«2 (2D+2 in atmosphere) 
Space: 8 
Atmosphere: 415; 1200 KMH 
Hull: 2D«1 
Shields: 2D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 40/1D 
Scan: 80/2D 
Search: 100/3D 
Focus: 6/4D 
Weapons: 
Three Medium Ion Cannons (fire-linked) 
Fire Arc: Front 
Creu: 1 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 3D 
Space Range: 1-3/12/25 
Atmosphere Range: 100-300/1.2KM/2.5KM 
Damage: 4D 
Twin Laser Cannon Turret 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Scale: Starfighter 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range; 1-3/12/25 
Atmosphere Range: 100-300M/1.2KM/2.5KM 
Damage: 5D 
Proton Torpedo Launcher 
Fire Arc: Front 
Crew: | (same gunner as ion cannon) 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Scale: Starfighter 
Fire Control: 2D 
Space Range: 1/3/7 
Atmosphere Range: 30-100/300/700M 
Damage: 9D 
Concussion Missile Launcher 
Fire Arc: Front 
Crew: 1 (same gunner as ion cannon) 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Scale: Starfighter 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range: 1/3/7 
Atmosphere Range: 1-50/100/250 
Damage: 6D 
Capsule: The Greetbos is the Skipray Blastboat 
most likely to be encountered by the characters in 
their adventures. It is commanded by Lieutenant 
Kader Tentrata, a sullen naval officer who looks at 
the Star Destroyers and the Rintonne’s Flame with 
sullen, resentful envy. Pity the poor pilot who is 
stopped by Lieutenant Tentrata, for that pilot will 


Elrood Sector Overview ns WA Wes 
es | 


become a victim of his foul temperament. This 
usually means getting a punishment that is far more 
severe than warranted. There are several other 
Blastboats in the sector that might be encountered 
as well — the gamemaster is encouraged to devise 
unique personalities for their crews as well. 


Other Imperial Vessels 


There are 12 hyperdrive equipped patrol craft 
assigned to Elrood Sector for patrolling trade 
routes, as well as the defense of Derilyn system. 
These craft can be equipped with a "TIE Modular 
Hangar," which attaches to the hull of the ship 
and can carry a pair of TIE fighters for additional 
firepower. 


Patrol Craft. Capital, capital ship gunnery 4D- I, 
capital ship piloting 5D. Maneuverability 2D, space 
5, hull 3D+1, shields 3D. Weapons: 4 laser can- 
nons (fire control 2D, damage 4D+2), 2 medium 
ion cannon (fire linked, starfighter scale, fire 
control 3D, damage 4D). 


There are six system patrol craft assigned 
exclusively to Derilyn system. They patrol the 
entire system looking for vessels trying to sneak 
through the Imperial blockade of the system. 
Note that these craft will only be encountered in 
Derilyn system as they aren't equipped with 
hyperdrive. 


System Patrol Craft. Capital, capital ship gun- 
nery 4D, capital ship piloting 4D«2. Maneuverabil- 
ity 2D+1, space 7, hull 3D+1, shields 3D. Weapons: 
4 laser cannons (fire control 2D, damage 4D). 


Aside from the TIE fighters on the Star De- 
stroyers, Derilyn itself has an orbiting space 
station, the Derilyn Space Defense Platform, with 
two full wings of TIE/In fighters (144 fighters). 


Derilyn Space Defense Platform. See the chap- 
ter on Derilyn for game statistics on the space 
platform. 


TIE/In Fighters. Starfighter, starfighter piloting 
3D+1, starship gunnery 3D. Maneuverability 2D, 
space 10, atmosphere 415; 1200 KMH, hull 2D. 
Weapons: 2 laser cannons (fire-linked, fire con- 
trol 2D, damage 5D). 


The Drift 


The Drift is a huge stellar gas cloud located 
between Lanthrym and unexplored sector terri- 
tory. The cloud’s rather exaggerated reputation 
as a navigational hazard has prevented further 
exploration of the farthest reaches of the sector. 

In truth, The Drift is a massive dust cloud with 
a modest number of asteroids and planetoids. 
However, dueto the nature of the cloud, starship 
sensors have a very difficult time plotting a safe 
route through The Drift. Any ship trying to pass 
through the Drift would have to navigate the 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— AR iI Elrood Sector Overview 
Se 


WA 


Imperial Observer's Report, Elrood Sector 


Lieutenant Darvis Tret, Reporting. 

I have spent the last six months of my tour 
of duty investigating Elrood Sector. All that I 
can say is that I am very pleased that not a 
single drop of Imperial blood was shed to gain 
this sector. This region was not one of the 
jewels in the Republic's crown. 

Elrood Sector is devoted to agriculture, 
mining and manufacturing, although it excels 
at none of them. I have found the inhabitants 
ofthe worlds to be unfailingly compliant. They 
areasimple folk who areignorant about every- 
thing save that they are at the bottom of the 
pecking order. The region of space has been 
settled for thousands of years, and frankly, 
there's not much to show for it. The popula- 
tion is predominantly Human and Gamorrean, 
with a smattering of other galactic species, as 
well as several native species, including the 
Coynites, Orfites, Meris and Teltiors. 

There are only a few worlds worthy of note. 
The sector capital is called Elrood (a testa- 
ment to the originality of the sector's deni- 
zens), a bureaucratic world that is also the 
headquarters of the sector's largest corpora- 
tion, Radell Mining. 

Kidron is a refuge planet for those who have 
earned the animosity of the powerful, wealthy, 
or dangerous. At first, [thought that this planet 
might prove to be a possible nest of Rebel 
sympathizers. | am happy to report that 
Kidron's citizens are refugees from local law 
enforcers, bounty hunters, collection agents 


region at torturously slow sublight speeds, tak- 
ing years to cross even the narrowest portion of 
The Drift. At this time, there are no routes going 
around the Drift, so that region of Elrood Sector 
beyond the Drift (and containing the so far un- 
known Kuras system) remains unexplored. 


The Degan Gas Clouds 


There are several small clusters of gas clouds 
near the Dega and Osirrag systems, collectively 
known as the Degan Gas Clouds. While these gas 
clouds pose a navigational hazard, the minor 
trade route running from Kidron to Dega does 
much toalleviate the inconvenience ofthe clouds. 
However, thelegends surroundingthe gas clouds 
are worth noting: ancient spacers' legends sug- 
gest that the clouds hide several rogue plan- 
etoids which harbor great treasures abandoned 
by an ancient space pirate. Still other legends 
suggest that a group of Star Dragons 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


and gangsters. This world poses no threat. 

Coynis a planet populated by warriors who 
uphold a strict, archaic code of honor. They 
excel as weapons makers. | am delighted to 
report that many Coynites willingly fight for 
the Empire. Again, no presence is needed 
here. 

Merisee is an agricultural planet that also 
boasts a rather extensive medical commu- 
nity. The people are peaceful and typically 
compliant. 

Derilyn is the last major planet, and the last 
stop on the Elrood-Derilyn Trade Route. Of all 
the worlds, Derilyn is the most valuable, since 
it has respectable natural resources and manu- 
facturing complexes. It is my recommenda- 
tion that Derilyn be seized and occupied. This 
action would also have a chilling effect on 
those who might consider rebellion. 

Establishing a naval base here would be 
ideal, as forces could easily patrol the rest of 
the sector from here. A pair of Star Destroyers 
will be more than enough to handle any poten- 
tial trouble in the sector. 

There are many systems in this sector that 
have not yet been explored. The Republic 
wisely refused to allocate further resources to 
an already mediocre region. 


Historical Note: This report was filed shortly 
before the Empire seized Derilyn. Lt. Tret was 
promoted for his efforts on behalf of the Em- 
pire. 


(Duinuogwuin) inhabit the clouds and fiercely 
guard their territory. Finally, other legends sug- 
gest that the gas clouds are inhabited by a kind of 
“ghost ship” or “dimensional creature,” both of 
which are purported to manifest themselves in 
times of great danger, either helping or attacking 
those who have ventured into the clouds (the 
legends vary). Naturally, all spacers publicly dis- 
miss thesestories as “deranged babbling of some- 
one who's been in the void too long” ... but 
spacers are a superstitious lot and no one has 
ever investigated these legends by travelling into 
the gas clouds. 


Minor Planets And Systems 


The following worlds and systems, while not 
“major” worlds, are of some interest and are 
worth noting. Gamemasters are encouraged to 
flesh out these worlds as needed, since they 
suggest a wealth of adventure possibilities. 


Almaran System 


Located close to Imperial Interdicted Space, 
Almar is a “second-class” planet even by Elrood 
standards. Since it isn't part of the Elrood-Derilyn 
Trade Route, it has a lesser volume of traffic than 
Elrood Sector’s main planets. 

Almar's biggest attraction is the Almar Up- 
side, a space station that has docking and repair 
facilities, as wellas the standard establishments, 
such as shops, bars, and hotels. Built by a corpo- 
ration headquartered on Derilyn, Almar Upside 
was going to be a resort where the wealthy 
people of Elrood could come to relax, play, and 
spend money. Of course, Elrood's hoped-for for- 
tunes never materialized. The corporation made 
the best of things, and tried to keep the station 
going. 

When the Empire moved in on Derilyn five 
years ago, the corporation was swallowed up. 
Before the Imperial forces got a chance to cata- 
logue the corporation's holdings, the computer 
banks were wiped. No "official" record of owner- 
ship of the station existed. The space station was 
considered fully independent. Over the years, 
the Rebel Alliance has quietly taken control and 
responsibility for the station. They have con- 
verted parts of it into a surveillance and listening 
post, aimed at Imperial Interdicted Space. 

Since the space station still receives some 
traffic, every effort is made to conceal the true 
loyalties of those who run it. To the outsider, and 
even to most employees, Almar Upside is simply 
an independent space station. All surveillance 
activities are hidden away in a very isolated 
corner of the station. 

Almar, also called Almar Downside, is a tropi- 
cal paradise. The planet is covered by sandy, 
colorful beaches, rolling orange-grass covered 
hills and lovely flowers. Proximity to its sun, no 
axial tilt, and a high amount of unique tempera- 
ture-moderating pollen in the atmosphere keeps 
the entire planet comfortably warm year round. 

A shuttle runs from Almar Upside to Almar 
Downside. The only starship services are pro- 
vided by a small control tower and spaceport 
located outside the only sizable city (it has about 
100,000 residents). The planet's entire popula- 
tion consists of immigrants from other worlds, 
and the main trade is tourism. Because of the 
world’s isolated location, it isa poor one, playing 
host to only a few hundred thousand tourists per 
year. The world has many small craftsmen and 
traders, as well as localized agriculture, so the 
planet, while poor, offers a primitive but relaxing 
lifestyle for residents. 


Berea 


Berea is host to a mining colony owned by 
Imperial Mining, Ltd. of Derilyn, which in turn, is 


Elrood Sector Overview ———— —————— SS, a 
| 


ARS 


Rebel Alliance Observer's Report, 
Elrood Sector 


An excerpt from a report to Alliance High 
Command filed by Alliance representative 
Frenil Alagar ... 

*... the people of Elrood Sector are well 
aware of how those from the heart of the 
galaxy perceive them: unsophisticated la- 
borers, This is untrue. 

"Those of Elrood — Human, Gamorrean, 
Coynite, Orfite, Meri, Teltior — are a stub- 
born folk, proud of their heritage, and hard- 
ened by generations of hard work. 

"The people of Elrood are no different 
than those found anywhere else in known 
space, They have their sterling examples of 
character, and they have their dregs. Some 
worlds, notably Elrood and Derilyn, have 
wonderful cultures, showing the same level 
of sophistication and articulation as those 
found on wealthier Core Worlds. 

"We should not fall victim to the cliché 
that distance from cosmopolitan areas or 
lack of wealth means a lack of manners or 
intelligence. While wecan lend no aid at this 
time, there is a place for them in the Rebel- 
lion if we can turn their energies to our 
cause." 


under the direct control of the Empire. This 
world is the chief source of ore for IML. 

The mine worker population is about one thou- 
sand people, plus several thousand automated 
mining droids. About one quarter of the workers 
are normal laborers; the rest come from interned 
freighter crews, supposedly waiting for some 
nebulous legal entanglements to be straightened 
out. Of course, they will have a long wait. All 
workers are regarded with suspicion since Berea's 
work conditions border on the criminal. Workers 
labor under the watchful eye of armed guards. 
Hired workers have marginally better quarters, 
as well as acceptable pay and equipment; con- 
scripted workers labor under the most difficult 
of conditions. 

Access to Berea is strictly controlled by IML, 
with only corporate ships and Imperial warships 
allowed into the system. All other ships entering 
the system are warned that they are trespassing 
in IML space and told to leave or face being shot 
down and imprisoned. 

Merchants and free-traders are not allowed to 
land or trade on Berea; all of Berea’s goods come 
from IML shuttles from nearby Derilyn. Berea has 
a small spaceport at the main mining complex. 
Besides the small docking facility, the complex 
has a small bi-state memory plastic administra- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— FR ns Elrood Sector Overview 
OO eee ee 


WA 


tive building, a storage shed for mining vehicles, 
anore-loading facility, and 20 long barracks build- 
ings (each providing shelter for 50 miners). 

Climate on the planet is cool and dry. Night- 
time temperatures drop below the freezing point 
of water, and vicious wind and hail storms are 
common. A common form of punishment is to 
force troublemakers to spend a night without 
shelter during one of these storms. Security is 
maintained by 20 private troops contracted by 
IML. 


20 IML Guards. All stats are 2D except: blaster: 
blaster pistol 4D, brawling 4D, security 3D, intimi- 
dation 5D. Move: 10. Blaster pistol (4D), armored 
vest (+1D physical, +1 energy), datapad, comlink. 


Adventure Hook: Characters who are care- 
less enough to get captured by the Empire could 
be sold into service to IML. The characters need 
to engineer a breakout. However, two of the 
miners in their work shift are Imperial stooges, 
and will attempt to warn Imperial Mining about 
any breakouts they learn of. Since any remaining 
miners will be punished if a breakout occurs, 
they make it their business to know these sorts of 
things very quickly —the characters may have to 
fend off hundreds of angry miners. 


Bodrin 


A small temperate planet, Bodrin is on the 
Elrood-Derilyn Trade Route. The planet has a 


WG 


N TANEN RANË SS - SQ wanes 


IM 


- Ld 
SS >N N ANN ANNIN E e n 


- ps 


ESNI 
ids ESSA E 


sse ES s => 


— 


— 


x 


~ 


E 


E) ANS — 


EE. =ò 


small spaceport offering clean facilities, food, 
repairs, and supplies. 

Bodrin has a warm summer, and cold snowy 
winters with very high winds. During the five 
month winter, the citizens hunker down in their 
homes, all mining stops, and the planet practi- 
cally closes up for the season. 

The planet’s economy depends on this small 
trade and some quarrying. Bodrin has a fine, 
marblized rock called bodrite that is in demand 
throughout the sector. The rock is used in floors 
and walls for elaborate palaces, expensive office 
complexes, and other ornate buildings of the 
wealthy. Because of the value of bodrite, Bodrin 
only has to produce about two thousand metric 
tons of the rock per year to maintain its trade 
balance. The product is difficult to quarry, so the 
planet is not wealthy by any means, but it is self- 
supporting. 

Planetary government is administered by the 
Elrood Quarry Corporation. Individuals may not 
carry weapons on Bodrin. Bodrin's police (often 
hired mercenaries) are heavily armed and have 
very little tolerance of crime — trespassing, as- 
sault, robbery, and other crimes are dealt with 
harshly. Bodrin is a quiet, frontier planet. The 
small towns are closely knit and crime is rare. 


Dega 
This is a medium-sized world orbiting a red 
sun. It is devoid of intelligent life. Dega used to be 


SS UNS 


CAS eK a 


Se Rae 


CNSSNSSSSSNNNMe. 0089 INNY WE 


EEE Dega: A world devastated by the ravages of corporate mining. 


Y 


QQ 


ASSASSIN 
OY 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


17 


one of Radell Mining’s mining worlds, but the 
veins played out several decades ago. 

The ecosystem has been destroyed. Plant life 

is scarce, and the water, what can be found of it, 
is poisoned by chemical wastes. Hot winds eerily 
whistle through the monstrous, rusted chunks of 
obsolete mining equipment and smelting facili- 
ties, all judged too old and useless to incur the 
expense of moving them off-planet. These silent 
steel ghosts rise from a planet surface that bears 
deep scars and holes from various mining opera- 
tions. ; 
The ground under Dega's surface is honey- 
combed with mining tunnels. Many are now un- 
safe, and a minor disturbance (such as a blaster 
skirmish) could cause a sizable collapse. 

Dega has but one use now: it is a favored site 
for negotiating illegal deals, exchanging contra- 
band, hiding hostages, and the like. Dega has 
become a neutral meeting ground for the many 
gangs, bounty hunters and criminals of the sec- 
tor. While there have been many minor battles 
and betrayals on Dega, the truce has held for 
most of the groups operating on Dega. 


Adventure Hook: While travelling through 
the Elrood Sector (but not on the E-D Run) the 
characters find a light freighter that has been 
holed by a small asteroid. The crew of three is 
dead. On one unfortunate is a small information 
disk which reveals that a Radell Miningexecutive's 
teenage daughter was kidnapped by six bounty 
hunters hired by Imperial Mining. The girl was 
taken from Elrood to Dega. 

On this ship were the three bounty hunters 
who were sent to deliver the ransom demands to 
the girl's father. The demands are for 1,000,000 
credits plus the schematics for a new mining drill 
that Radell is developing. The cash and the plans 
are to be delivered to Dega Smelting Facility #4- 
Z3. As the situation now stands, the girl's father 
knows that she is missing, but not why. 


Halbara 


A tropical planet with great mountain ranges, 
Halbarais a world rich in ores, andis the primary 
source of Radell's mineral wealth. Halbara's cli- 
mate is hot and steamy in the spring and sum- 
mer. The fall is a rainy season, while the winter is 
characterized by powerful monsoon-like storms. 

Daytimetemperatures reach about 30 degrees 
centigrade, with thick and uncomfortable humid- 
ity. Nighttime temperatures fall to about 15 de- 
grees, but the humidity breaks most of the time. 
The world is thick with jungle growth, animals 
and insects (which pose a major annoyance un- 
less using the proper repellents). 

At least a dozen mines dot the planet. All 
operations are run from a centralized location 
called Halbara One. Halbara One facilities in- 


Elrood Sector Overview —————————————s—saU D PA. D 
——————————————————————— 


ARS" 


clude a spaceport, an ore-loading facility, a small 
corporate office building, and an apartment com- 
plex for the miners. 

Radell treats its miners well, with good pay 
and adequate safety considerations. Radell is 
aware of the threat of Imperial Mining, Ltd., and 
as a result has hired over one thousand Coynite 
mercenaries (see the entry on the planet Coyn) 
to guard its facilities. The mercenaries' chief 
mission is to be on the lookout for industrial 
sabotage. Therefore, a vessel that enters the 
system unannounced is suspicious. Normal pro- 
cedure requires that visitors go to Radell Mining 
headquarters on Elrood and get an authorization 
code and permission to visit the mining colony. 


Korad 


This small dusty planet is akin to a roadside 
stopover that has seen better days. There is a 
small automated landing pad on the planet's 
north pole that is serviceable for repairing minor 
ship damage. Most ship pilots simply bypass 
Korad and continue on the E-D Run. 

These days, Korad has one prime business: 
salvage. The planet was originally settled in the 
time of the Old Republic by a corporation called 
Renew, which specialized in metal reclamation 
and wreck salvage. Korad was used as a dumping 
ground for old ships, vehicles, machinery and 
other wastes. Many years ago, Renew went bank- 
rupt, leaving the world independent. To this day, 
the world is a giant refuse yard — it is a place 
where just about anything can be abandoned 
with no questions asked (since no one is in 
charge of the planet). Many criminals use the 
planet as a good place to dump the bodies of 
beings who are "in the way." 

Circlingthe planet's circumference like a natu- 
ralspaceringis aband of scrapped vessels, many 
dating back to the Old Republic. The barren 
surface is littered with wrecks, ranging from 
starfighters,to freighters, to repulsorlift vehicles, 
to old droids, to old landspeeders. The atmo- 
sphere is thick with the odor of leaking fluids 
from the wrecks, spilled chemicals and the like. 
Korad's atmosphere requires a breather mask. 

On Korad, a character can find the remains of 
practically every model of vessel or planetary 
vehicle. Naturally, most are stripped. Finding a 
useful part is a Very Difficult search skill roll. The 
closest thing toa caretaker is a wheezy old public 
relations droid named Emtee-Seventee. MT-7T is 
still functional, though its programming is in- 
complete, as parts of its memory have been 
erased. The droid is left over from the days when 
Renew was still in business. When Renew went 
bankrupt, the remaining staff evacuated quickly. 
There was only one vessel for evacuation pur- 
poses, and there was just no room for the droid. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


cs E lIrood Sector Overview 
pg aaa ——— — € 


WA 


EEE One of Korad's countless yards of discarded ships... 


It is believed that several groups of scaven- 
gers and refugees have taken up residence in the 
unending piles of refuse. Several groups of Ugors 
frequent the area. 


Lanthrym 


An ice planet orbiting a yellow sun, Lanthrym is 
a world of people still angry about a slight that 
occurred centuries ago. When the Elrood-Derilyn 
Trade Route was assembled, Lanthrym and Coyn 
competed to be the third major stop on the route. 
When Coyn received the endorsement, the gover- 
nor of Lanthrym was enraged and insulted. 

Though that governor is dead, a descendant of 
his lives on as governor and carries on that hatred. 
As a result of the trade route choice, Coyn's for- 
tunes increased while Lanthrym's declined. 

The population, fed a constant stream of pro- 
paganda by the government, is sullen and resent- 
ful. Lanthrym is the only planet in the sector 
where Gamorreans are in the majority, and the 
politicians have openly suggested that Coyn was 
chosen because the Coynites “have chosen to 
cultivate good relations with their Human mas- 
ters." People who come from Coyn are often 
assaulted and their ships vandalized. 

Dueto its weak economy and the desire to get 
even with the other worlds that have slighted 
them, Lanthrym has tacitly allowed criminals 
and smugglers to operate with minimal interfer- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


ence. Of late, the pirate Dorok and his men have 
moved into the Lanthrym system. Law enforce- 
ment officials are corrupt ("justice" goes to the 
one who pays the most) and the only real law 
hinges on a being's skill with a blaster. 

Most of the buildings are underground, fed by 
geothermal energy. Lanthrym boasts a large num- 
ber of bars, clubs, casinos, arenas for gladiator 
combat, hotels, and other establishments that 
cater to the baser interests. 

Lanthrym has a thriving black market and 
forgery trade. Items and weapons banned or 
regulated in the Empire can be found here at 
greatly inflated prices. Those who need false 
identification so that they may "disappear" are 
well advised to come to this world as well. 

Governor Alrym II is a plain-looking, spindly 
man. He never travels anywhere without his six 
hired Gamorrean guards, and two female com- 
panions, one on each arm. 

Lanthrym is also the sector’s leading pro- 
ducer of salt and other sodium products. Aside 
from the profits from rare sodium compounds, 
the mines are a perfect form of punishment for 
those who exceed even Lanthrym’s liberal stan- 
dards of behavior. 


Adventure Hook: A nervous man hires the 
characters and their ship to take him to Lanthrym. 
The man owes a local crime boss a large amount 
of credits, and he is coming to ask for an exten- 


ARS" 


Elrood Sector Overview — ————— ——————— áá——9MáááD I DÀ Fo 
————————————————————————————— 


20 


sion. As it turns out, a gang of toughs, eager to 
make a name for themselves, jump the charac- 
ters and try to kill them. The characters' em- 
ployer dies during the fight. 

The man was a friend of Governor Alrym, a fact 
not known by anyone until after the victim's 
death, when the local law enforcement officer 
investigating the scene (long after the gang has 
fled) positively identifies the victim. The local 
law believes that the characters are somehow 
responsible for the man's death. The characters' 
ship is impounded. The characters must some- 
how retrieve their ship and avoid the law while 
trying to establish their innocence. 


Osirrag 

This small planet boasts a pleasant climate of 
light breezes, perfumed air, and moderate tem- 
peratures. Summers are warm and calm; winters 
are cool with minimal snow. During the spring 
and summer, small delicate insects spin gossa- 
mer strands everywhere. 

Osirrag boasts a small number of colonies, 
mostly engaged in subsistence agriculture. The 
world lies far off the main trade routes and seems 
to offer few resources, although it is a pleasant 
and safe world. 

There is a common folktale of this planet. Off 
in the unsettled wilderness of the world, there is 
believed to be a species of sentient wind crea- 
tures. Each of these creatures is invisible to the 
unaided eye, but they are reputed to communi- 
cate by whistles. The legend states that one 
young boy, hundreds of years ago, searched out 
these creatures, and was welcomed by them. 
They learned to communicate with him, and 
somehow they have extended his life span for 
many centuries. It is believed that he is their 
guardian, responsible for the conduct of his 
people and the defense of these creatures. 


Tifnyl 

Tifnyl System has no habitable planets. The 
largest moon ofthe fourth planet, a gas giant, has 
a thin atmosphere and a primitive ecosystem. 

The Empire has set up a small listening post 
here. À crew of 10 technicians and 10 Imperial 
Navy troops man the station. One of the two 
Imperial Star Destroyers docks hereoncea month 
to rotate crew members and drop off supplies. 

The post’s military value is negligible. It was 
established by Moff Villis Andal as a ploy to get 
additional credits sent to his sector from the 
public dole, and so far the plan has worked 
remarkably well. 


Adventure Hook: The Alliance has found out 
about the existence of the listening post, and has 
commissioned the characters to destroy it with 
a commando raid. However, Moff Andal has re- 


cently been asked to again account for the post's 
existence thanks to an audit in the Empire's Office 
of Military Accounting. Moff Andal has deliberately 
leaked out information to the Rebels about its 
presence to lure the Rebellion into attacking it. 
Thus, the Moff can claim that the post's function is 
as a trap for capturing Rebels ... 


Torina 


For years, Torina suffered the stigma of being 
a minor stop on a small trade run. When Derilyn 
was seized by the Empire, Torina became more 
important to sector trade. In the past few years, 
a major land spaceport and two orbital space- 
ports were built. Hotels, bars, casinos, and ware- 
houses have sprung up to handle the new eco- 
nomic boom. The Torines (a near-Human race) 
haveinvested their profits in additional industry, 
but also have a strong aesthetic streak and have 
spent much on beautifying their world and main- 
taining the overall ecosphere. 

Besides trade, Torina has a thriving electron- 
ics industry. Most consumer electronics can be 
found on Torina for 20 percent less than normal 
rates. However, they are local knockoffs, and are 
thus not as reliable as brand name products (for 
example, if using a complication on the Wild Die, 
a Torine product fails). One repair attempt can 
be tried, and it is a Moderate task. If the roll 
succeeds, the item resumes operation. If the roll 
fails, the item is permanently damaged and can- 
not be repaired. Once characters have learned 
better, they will probably seek out "brand name" 
electronics and find out that Torina levies a 50 
percent tariff on imported electronics! 

The primary corporation that manufactures 
these inferior products is Quality Electronics of 
Torina. They have offices and major retail outlets 
on Coyn, Lanthrym, and Elrood proper, and their 
products are available through independent 
merchants throughout the sector. _ 

If there is one emotion that governs most 
Torines today, it is fear. Despite their newfound 
wealth, the Torines see themselves as teetering 
on the brink of Imperial domination. Any day 
now, the Torines expect to see a huge Imperial 
fleet arriving in-system, bent on conquering the 
small planet. Thus far, the only overt Imperial 
presence is the occasional shuttle that trans- 
ports a few Imperial officers here, ostensibly for 
relaxation purposes. 

Behind the placid images of a peaceful and 
prosperous world, Torina is a center of Imperial 
and Rebellion espionage. The world is controlled 
by the Empire, no matter how marginally. How- 
ever, the Empire is keeping a close eye on the 
planet to determine if a more forceful presence is 
warranted. Naturally, the Rebellion is trying to 
quietly earn the Torines' support. The Torines 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— | AR es Elrood Sector Overview 


Devron Zal 


Type: Small Corporation Junior Executive 

DEXTERITY 2D 

Blaster: hold-out blaster 5D, dodge 5D 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Bureaucracy 6D, business 6D+2, languages 5D, planetary systems: Elrood Sector 5D+2, 
value 6D, willpower 7D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

Ground vehicle operation 2D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 7D, con 6D, persuasion 6D 

STRENGTH 2D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

First aid 3D, security 3D+2 

Character Points: 5 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, datapad, recording rod, several flashy 
business suits, Radell Mining expense card 


Capsule: Devron is a junior executive with Radell Mining. His official title is 


“Chief Contractor Liaison” — he is in charge of hiring temporary and contract 
employees. He joined Radell at an early age as a prodigy, and has rocketed to 
his current position. He wants to see Radell triumph over Imperial Mining. 

A handsome young man with a warm handshake and an impish grin, 
Devron is smooth, confident, and polished. He is an extremely good dresser 
who uses lots of cologne and hair lotion. 

Beneath his polished veneer is an accomplished, hard-nosed negotiator. 
He is always looking for ways to gain the upper hand in negotiations with 
freelancers, A man of great ambition, he wants to rise higher in the company 
by any means possible. If those he hires do their job well, he is warm and 
friendly towards them. His disdain is evident for those who fall short of his 


expectations. 


must be very careful in the next few years to 
avoid violent retribution for “rebelliousness.” 


The Unexplored Systems 


Due to the backward nature of the Elrood 
Sector and the many navigational hazards off the 
established travel routes, there are many unex- 
plored systems in Elrood Sector (these unex- 
plored systems are not shown on the sector map 
on page 10). Gamemasters are encouraged to 
make exploration a prominent theme in Elrood 
Sector. While there aren’t any undiscovered 
space-faring civilizations in this area of space, 
there could be many information age or lower 
tech-level planets out there that haven’t made 
contact, as well as countless unregistered settle- 
ments, lost cultures, alien artifacts and other 
elements that can be the focus of exploration 
adventures. For more information on this type of 
adventure, see Galaxy Guide 8: Scouts. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Radell Mining Corporation 


Radell Mining Corporation (RMC) was founded 
on the planet Elrood centuries ago to handle the 
anticipated flow of mineral wealth from Elrood 
Sector. The company has never become a major 
force in galactic mining, but enough revenue can 
be wrung from the planets so that Radell makes 
a respectable profit and continues to be the 
largest company in the sector. 

Radell's main source of ore is in the Halbara 
system, and it treats the route from Elrood to 
Halbara as a vital “trade secret." Radell has hold- 
ings in several nearby sectors, but it isn't very 
important to the galactic economy. Locally, work- 
ing for Radell is a sign of prestige. 

These days, Radell is interested in hiring ex- 
ploration parties to find new sources of mineral 
wealth in the sector. It also employs freelancers 
to guard ships and facilities against corporate 
sabotage, often perpetrated by its prime com- 
petitor, Imperial Mining. Radell pays for reason- 
able expenses, plus a base rate of between 75 and 


300 credits per day. 

If the characters seek employment through 
Radell, their most likely contact is Devron Zal. 
Though there are dozens of such executives who 
hire adventurers, Devron is one of the best and 
he is known for being able to quickly and accu- 
rately assess recruits. 


Imperial Mining, Ltd. 

Founded on Derilyn a few years ago by retired 
Imperial naval personnel, Imperial Mining, Ltd. 
(IML) owes its success to the fact that the Empire 
forcibly persuades some customers to use IML. 

IML's chief source of ore is the Berea system, 
a short jump from Derilyn and securely within 
the bounds Imperial Interdicted Space. Many 
Elrood citizens feel that IML is an active front for 
the Empire. Whispered stories of espionage and 
sabotage designed to promote the Empire's in- 
terests abound. 

IML has a sizable cargo fleet courtesy of the 
Empire's navy — ships entering the Derilyn sys- 
tem are often boarded and searched, and many 
confiscated ships become the property of IML. 
As one might expect, many of the ship seizures 
are questionable (at best). Crew members aboard 
such ships are quickly convicted of smuggling 
and sent to work off their sentence as slave- 
miners leased to IML. Individuals are paid 25 
credits a day for their labors, but IML's charges 
to “contract employees” for equipment, room 
and board comes out to 23 credits a day, so a 
worker can only reasonably expect to earn 736 
credits “take home” pay per year. 


Crime Bosses 


Like most other regions of the galaxy, the 
criminal underworld is alive and well in Elrood 
Sector. There are several prominent crime bosses 
in the sector. 

These characters can have many uses in an 
Elrood Sector campaign. Characters may encoun- 
ter the bosses when they need a quick, “no 
questions asked” high interest loan (for guide- 
lines on “Ioan sharking,” see pages 26 and 27 of 
Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp Freighters). Perhaps the 
characters’ heroics are attracting too much at- 
tention, and the crime bosses want the charac- 
ters “silenced.” Acrime boss might anonymously 
help sponsor a down-and-out group of charac- 
ters, only to “call in the favor” later (the favor 
could involve striking against a rival crimelord, 
or perhaps smuggling some contraband through 
heavy Imperial patrols). 

m Lud Chud 
Type: Rakaan (Neuter) Crime Boss 


DEXTERITY 2D+1 
Blaster 4D, dodge 6D, pick pocket 5D, running 4D, webs 6D 


Elrood Sector Overview ———————a——— LE 
e a ———— 


ARS 


KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Bureaucracy 5D, business 6D, intimidation 7D, law en- 
forcement 4D+1, planetary systems: Elrood Sector 5D, 
streetwise 7D+1, value 5D 

MECHANICAL 2D+1 

Communications 6D 

PERCEPTION 4D 

Bargain 6D, command 7D, con 7D-2, gambling 6D, hide 8D, 
persuasion 8D, sneak 8D 

STRENGTH 4D+2 

Brawling 6D, climbing/jumping 8D 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Security 4D 

Special Abilities: 

Fangs: STR+1D damage 

Webbing: Chud can shoot 2 webs from its abdomen every 
round, using its webs skill. Breaking out of a web is a Very 
Difficult Strength or lifting task. The webs retain their 
potency for two hours, and have a range of 3-4/8/12. 
Neuter Phase: In neuter phase, Lud Chud may add +1D to 
Strength and all Strength-related skills, as well as increase 
Move by «2. 

Character Points: 12 

Move: 14, 12 (swimming) 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D) 


Capsule: Lud is an 80-year-old Rakaan. It has always 
had a talent for crime, and has settled on Torina as 
the premier crime boss. It was only when the Em- 
pire took over Derilyn and Torina rose in impor- 
tance did Lud's criminal empire gain much worth. 

Lud has influence, property, and henchmen 
throughout Elrood Sector, but it concentrates its 
activities on Torina, Lanthrym, and Elrood. At these 
sites, it engages in loansharking, protection rackets, 
black marketeering, forgery, smuggling, and other 
unsavory activities. 

Few beings have seen Lud. It allows others to 
circulate the misperception that it is a humanoid 
male. 

A cunning but lazy being, Lud sits in its lair and 
hatches new schemes while revelling in its power. 
Though it is willing to talk and negotiate, it is a clever 
negotiator and twists words to get peopleto do what 
it wants. 

Lud eats people who do not agree with it. It keeps 
many victims dangling in cocoons in its lair. Lud is 
getting close to Transition; it is currently in neuter 
phase. 

Boss Kaggle is Lud's biggest rival. Lud's chief 
ambitions are to bethe absolute head of all crime in 
the Sector, and to get rid of Kaggle. 


m Boss Kaggle 
Type: Dazouri Crime Boss 
Rest Form 
DEXTERITY 1D 
Brawling parry 1D+2, dodge 6D, melee combat 1D+1, 
melee parry 4D, pick pocket 7D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Bureaucracy 6D, business 6D, cultures: Elrood Sector 
6D+1, intimidation 6D, languages 5D, law enforcement 
5D-2, planetary systems 6D, streetwise 6D, survival 5D, 
value 5D, willpower 6D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 6D, command 6D, con 7D, forgery 5D+1, gambling 
6D+2, hide 7D, persuasion 6D, sneak 6D 
STRENGTH 1D 
Brawling 2D, climbing/jumping 3D, melee combat 1D+1, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


-WA 


stamina 3D 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 6D, droid programming 
5D, droid repair 5D, security 7D 


Brawling parry 5D+2, dodge 10D, melee combat 5D+1, 
melee parry 8D 

KNOWLEDGE 1D 

Intimidation 4D 

MECHANICAL 1D 

PERCEPTION 1D 

STRENGTH 5D 

Brawling 8D, climbing/jumping 7D, lifting 6D+2, stamina 
7D 

TECHNICAL 1D 

Special Abilities: 

Rage: When a Dazouri is wounded, badly frightened, 
threatened with bodily harm, successfully intimidated or 
infuriated, he transforms into his rage form. He can also 
initiate it at will, but it is a Very Difficult Perception task. 
Kaggle can prevent his rage transformation with a Heroic 
Perception task. 

Dazouris and Lahsbees are closely related races: “genetic 
cousins” in the same way that Humans and near-Human 
races are closely related. Like the Lahsbees, Dazouris 
physically transform from one form to another. The char- 
acter must allocate dice for the rage and rest forms. 
Dazouris also receive a bonus of +1D to Dexterity and 
Strength for their rage form. Dazouris retain the same skill 
adds, no matter their form. Dazouris in rage form may only 
use brawling parry, dodge, melee combat, melee parry, 
intimidation, brawling, climbing/jumping and lifting. 
Claws: STR+2D damage (rage form only) 

Teeth: STR+1D+2 damage (rage form only) 

Horns: STR+1D damage (rage form only) 

This character is Force-sensitive 

Force Points: 1 

Dark Side Points: 4 

Character Points: 14 

Move: 8 (in rest form), 12 (in rage form) 

Equipment: Datapad 


Capsule: Boss Kaggle is a Dazouri, a species that 
has two forms, rest and rage. Starting out as a petty 
thief, he used the combination of his intelligence 
and his violent form to rise in the criminal under- 
world of his home sector. 

In his normal Dazouri rest form, Boss Kaggle is a 
scrawny, hairless, one-meter-tall creature with spin- 
dly limbs. He has big, black saucer eyes, vestigial 
horns on his upper forehead, and a thin reedy 
voice. 

In his rage form, he transforms into a 3.2-meter- 
tall hulking brute with shaggy black fur, huge claws 
and fangs, and a pair of wicked horns. 

Boss Kaggle makes his home on Lanthrym, where 
he has a palatial home and an impressive force of 
bodyguards. Even though he does not truly need 
guards, their presence perpetuates the illusion of 
him being a small, fragile creature. 

In his rest form, Kaggle is a shrewd, calculating 
little creature who appears physically helpless. He 
voices a distaste for violence and a dislike of pain 
(*Oh, please don't threaten me, gentlemen, it up- 
sets me so! You really don't want to upset me, do 
you?") Everything in his manner speaks of "talking 
this out." 

In rage form, Kaggle is a homicidal maniac that 
mows down anything that is standing. Usually, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


à 


E "" NS 
| Nest 


Kaggle's bodyguards and aides leave the room 
when they see that he is about to make the change. 
This makes many of Kaggle's soon-to-be-victims 
overconfident, feeling that they can now manipu- 
late the small alien. 

One of Kaggle's biggest objectives is to build up 
a large crime empire and get rid of his hated rival, 
Lud Chud. 


Pirates 


There are a couple of active pirate bands in 
Elrood Sector. Despite their best efforts, the 
Imperials have been unable to eliminate or cap- 
ture them, much to the chagrin of Moff Andal. 


m Grakkata 
Type: Wookiee Pirate 
DEXTERITY 1D 
Bowcaster 4D«1, brawling parry 3D, dodge 4D, melee 
2D+2, melee parry 4D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D+1 
Business 3D, intimidation 7D, languages 4D, planetary 
systems: Elrood Sector 4D+2, streetwise 3D, survival 4D, 
value 3D, willpower 3D 
MECHANICAL 1D 
Astrogation 3D+1, repulsorlift operation 4D, space trans- 
ports 5D, starfighter piloting 4D+2, starship gunnery 3D+1 
PERCEPTION 1D 
Command 2D, hide 3D, sneak 4D 
STRENGTH 4D+2 


Elrood Sector Overview 


E 
"m d 


Elrood Sector Overview ————————ss— À I A a 


24 


Rakaans —— 


Rakaans are large, predatory creatures 
from Rakaa IV, a warm jungle and forest 
world on the edge of the Core. The creatures 
are rarely encountered away from their 
homeworld. 

Physically, Rakaans have a segmented, 
mottled green to dark brown body, with a 
bloated abdomen and ten limbs. The back 
eight legs work together for fast locomotion 
and swimming, while the front two limbs, 
longer and nimbler, aretool-using limbs with 
prehensile hands and opposable digits. 

Rakaans can shoot webs to trap prey. The 
webs are created in a small sac on top of the 
abdomen, and are shot out of the top side of 
the abdomen segment. Normal webs can last 
for about two hours. Rakaans who chew on 
the nargk root native to their world can mix 
its juices with their saliva to produce a pre- 
servative adhesive that can last for many 
weeks without losing strength. This adhesive 
is used to cocoon victims for later feeding. A 
pair of glands inside a Rakaan's mouth pro- 
duces an acidic substance that dissolves the 
webs. 

The Rakaan "head" is mounted on a long 
neck. The face boasts four segmented eyes, 
which can moveindependently of each other, 
andasmall opening that leads to the Rakaan's 
hearing organs. A series of pits on the head 
allows the Rakaan to breathe when the rest of 
the body is underwater. 

The Rakaan mouth is located underneath 
the abdomen, and is equipped with a set of 
mandibles. A Rakaan canalso breathethrough 
its mouth. The brain is located in the center 
of the abdomen, along with the other major 
vital organs, well-cushioned from impacts 
and injury. 

Rakaans are native to warmer climates: 
they go into hibernation in cold weather 
(below zero degrees standard). The normal 
Rakaan life span is about 160 standard years. 

Rakaans have five life phases, which also 
correspond to unique sexes — child, female, 
neuter, male, and andro. Each Rakaan nor- 
mally experiences at least three phases dur- 
ing its lifetime. There is no steady cycle of the 
life phases: on average, a Rakaan is in child 
phase for the first 30 years ofits life, butit may 


stay in this phase for as few as five or as many 
as 60 years. Likewise, the retention of the 
other sexes is highly variable. A Rakaan might 
retain a sex for as little as three months or for 
as long as 80 years. Some scientists theorize 
that the distribution of the sexes, and the 
biological change from one sex to another, 
called the Transition, is part of a natural 
rhythm that ensures that there are enough 
Rakaans of all sexes to perpetuate the spe- 
cies. Scientists have noted that in times of 
famine, the neuter population skyrockets, 
while in times of severe depopulation, such 
as during hive wars, the neuter population 
plummets, children mature quickly and the 
male, female and andro populations increase 
at a very rapid rate. 

When a Rakaan is in Transition, the old sex 
characteristics disappear, while thenew ones 
mature and grow, often within the span of 
two to three standard weeks. During this 
period, Rakaans become very violent and 
ravenously hungry. 

Thechild phaseis the earliest ofall phases. 
The Rakaan is physically much smaller than 
all other phases (normally only about half to 
one meter tall), and it is in this phase that 
Rakaans learn much about survival from the 
more mature members of their species. 

In the neuter phase, Rakaans are quite 
strong, but still physically small (about 1.5 to 
2 meters tall). Neutral Rakaans are used as 
hunters, guards and warriors, as they have a 
very compact but dense muscle structure. 
Their altered metabolism allows for the very 
efficient use of energy, and thus their food 
requirements are smaller than in other 
phases. In times of peace, with no overriding 
threats, upwards of 80 percent the Rakaan 
population may be in neuter phase. During 
times of conflict, the Rakaan population is 
also overwhelmingly neuter. However, as 
soon as the conflict dies down or the popula- 
tion reaches a critically low number, neuters 
begin changing into the other sexes and be- 
gin bearing children. 

In male phase, Rakaans areresponsible for 
fertilizing the Rakaan eggs which females lay. 
A male Rakaan is only slightly larger than the 
neuter phase (about two meters tall). 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— Rr oe Elrood Sector Overview 


Infemale phase, Rakaans lay eggs. 
After the eggs are fertilized, the fe- 
male retakes the eggs into her ab- 
domen, where they are nourished. 
Rakaans in female phase are larg- 
est, reaching their full height, and 
their abdomen normally elongates, 
giving them a length of up to four 
meters. After the eggs have been 
nourished for three months, the 
eggs are released into a nesting 
chamber, where the andro phase 
Rakaans are responsible for bring- 
ing the eggs to maturity. 

The final Rakaan phase, andro, is 
of average size for the Rakaan spe- 
cies. The andro is responsible for 
nurturing fertilized eggs. The 
andro’s glands produce a unique 
paste, released through the mouth, 
which must bespread over the eggs. 
The nourishment from the eggs 
feeds the young Rakaan until they 
are ready to hatch into child phase, 
three months later. 


m Rakaan 
Attribute Dice: 12D 
DEXTERITY 1D/4D 
KNOWLEDGE 2D/4D+2 


MECHANICAL 1D/3D+1 NOMAD 
PERCEPTION 1D/5D AAU 


RENE USES NS S 
STRENGTH 2D+2/5D ette DUNS NS (S 
TECHNICAL 1D/2D.«1 annsi TOR SS MOONY 


SPF ANN 
PQ SMS Saas 


Special Skills: Mou Ss 
Dexterity skills: 

Webs. Time to use: One round. This is EEE A Rakaan in neuter phase. 
the skill used to shoot the Rakaan's 


webs. 

Special Abilities: 

Fangs: Do STR+1D damage. that affect their die codes. They are child, neuter, 
Webbing: Rakaans can shoot up to two webs every round; male, female and andro. 


their bodies can produce three webs per standard hour Child: -1D to Strength, -2 to Dexterity, -3 to Move. 
(assuming the Rakaan is well fed), and the abdominal sac Neuter: «1D to Strength, +2 to Move. 

can hold up to 10 webs. Breaking out of the webbing is a Male: «2 to Perception, «1 to Strength. 

Very Difficult Strength or lifting task. Normal webbing lasts Female: +2 to Strength, +2D armor to abdomen area, -1 
up to two hours, although with the preservative saliva to Move. 

Rakaans make, a web can last for several weeks. The webs Andro: -3 to Move. 

have ranges of 3—-4/8/12. Move: 11/15 (walking), 11/14 (swimming) 

Phases: Rakaans have several unique life cycle/sex phases Size: 1.5-3 meters tall, 2-4 meters long 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 25 


Brawling 6D+2, climbing/jumping 6D, lifting 6D, stamina 
5D«1 

TECHNICAL 2D 

Computer programming/repair 3D, droid repair 3D, 
repulsorlift repair 3D, starship repair 4D«1 

Special Abilities: 

Berserker Rage: «2D to Strength when in immediate dan- 
ger. See page 137 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, 
Second Edition and page 124 of the Gamemaster Handbook. 
Climbing Claws: Add «2D to climbing. 

Force Points: 2 

Dark Side Points: 1 

Character Points: 7 

Move: 11 

Equipment: Bowcaster (4D), comlink, datapad 


Capsule: Grakkata is a 2.5-meter-tall Wookiee with 
gray shaggy hair. She keeps her equipment and 
bowcaster stored on harnesses crisscrossing her 
chest. Her eyes are a soft green color. 

Grakkata has plied the space lanes of Elrood for 
the past three years. She has been on the run from 
the Empire ever since she escaped from slavery 
several years ago. After absconding with a light 
freighter originally confiscated by the Empire, 
Grakkata came to Elrood Sector to "disappear." 

Although sheis a pirate, Grakkata adheres to the 


Type: Bloodthirsty Pirate 


DEXTERITY 3D+2 


Elrood Sector Overview eee) = 
ee a ee eee 


ARS" 


Wookiee code of honor. As a rule, she raids only 
Imperial-affiliated vessels or other pirates. Her 
choice of targets has made her many enemies. 
Grakkata shares the Wookiee tendency toward vio- 
lence, but her intimidating presenceis often enough 
to get appropriate levels of cooperation from her 
victims. Aside from piracy, Grakkata is involved 
with smuggling, illicit passenger ferrying and gun 
running. She loves travelling the Extreme, as it 
represents a challenge. 

Characters will have a strong ally in Grakkata if 
they make friends with her. She knows Elrood Sec- 
tor inside and out, and if they earn her confidence, 
she will provide advice and act as guide for the 
newcomer characters. Grakkata wants to stay alive 
and prosper, and seethe Rebellion beat the Empire, 
which will enable her to return to Kashyyyk. 


m Treespirit 


Craft: Ghtroc Industries class 720 freighter 
Type: Modified light freighter 

Scale: Starfighter 

Length: 35 meters 

Skill: Space transports: Ghtroc freighter 
Crew: 1; 1 can coordinate 

Crew Skill: see Grakkata 


Dorok Zalaster 


Blaster 6D, dodge 5D, pick pocket 4D 


KNOWLEDGE 3D 


Alien species 4D+2, intimidation 6D+1, planetary systems: Elrood Sector 6D+2, streetwise 


5D 
MECHANICAL 2D+2 


Space transports 4D, starfighter piloting 4D+1, starship gunnery 4D, starship shields 3D 


PERCEPTION 2D 


Command 4D, con 3D, forgery 3D, hide 5D, sneak 5D+1 


STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 5D+2 
TECHNICAL 3D 
Security 4D 
Character Points: 9 
Move: 10 


Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), two grenades (5D), blast vest (+1D physical; +1 
energy), comlink 


Capsule: Dorok is an older 1.75-meter-tall Human male. His hardened face 
indicates a hard life of crime. His bald head is covered with tattoos. A huge 
scar runs from the top of his head, down the left side of his face, ending at his 
chin. He has an evil smirk. 

Acriminal since he was a young pickpocket in the Corellian System, Dorok 
is hiding out in the Elrood Sector with his band of devoted pirates. 

A dirty fighter, cruel, avaricious, and opportunistic, Dorok is exactly the 
sort of person you don't want to meet in a dark alley. He cares little for galactic 
politics. Dorok steals from everyone and is not averse to killing everyone on 
a ship just for the sheer pleasure of it. Dorok thinks he has the gift of a witty 
turn of a phrase, but he is little more than a murderous bully. 

Dorokis a highly successful pirate— that’s all that he does well. He fancies 
himself a jack of all trades, but fails miserably in all other endeavors. Dorok 
and his men have a pirate base on the isolated world of Lanthrym. The base 
exists with the quiet acceptance of Lanthrym's government. 

He has many spies throughout the sector, who scour cantinas, starports 
and other spacer haunts looking for information on ship schedules and 
cargoes. 


26 Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


—TA 
WA 


Passengers: 10 
Cargo Capacity: 135 metric tons 
Consumables: 2 months 
Cost: 46,750 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Hyperdrive Backup: x15 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Maneuverability: 2D 
Space: 4 
Atmosphere: 280; 800 KMH 
Hull: 4D 
Shields: 2D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 15/0D 
Scan: 30/1D 
Search: 50/3D 
Focus: 2/4D 
Weapons: 
Four Laser Cannons (fire-linked) 
Fire Arc: Turret 
Crew: Pilot or co-pilot 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D+1 
Space Range: 1-3/12/25 
Atmosphere Range: 100-300/1.2KM/2.5KM 
Damage: 6D 


Capsule: The 7reespiritis a battered-looking Ghtroc 
freighter that Grakkata has modified substantially 
since she stole it several years ago. Its most notice- 
able feature is the color scheme: the entire ship is 
a soft forest green to match the color of her native 
Kashyyyk. What isn't readily noticeable are the four 
retractable laser cannon: they've been an unpleas- 
ant surprise to many careless TIE pilots. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Doroks Pirate Fleet 


Dorok has a pirate fleet consisting of The Last 
Thing, a modified customs cruiser, and eight 
scout ships. All were captured during various 
heists (the escapade leading to the capture of the 
Imperial customs cruiser is Dorok's favoritetale). 
While the ships aren't as well maintained as they 
were previously, the fleet is still a danger to 
poorly armed private freighters. 

Dorok has 34 underlings actively involved in 
piracy, along with his countless spies. They are 
all unprincipled dregs who would sell each other 
out, but Dorok keeps them in line because of the 
wealth he can offer them. If Dorok's men attack 
the characters, use the following stats. 


Dorok's pirates. All stats are 2D except: blaster 
5D, space transports 5D, Strength 3D, brawling 
4D+1. Move: 10. Blaster pistol (4D damage). 


m The Last Thing 
Craft: Seinar Fleet Systems 344 class Light Cruiser 
Type: Modified Imperial Customs Light Cruiser 
Scale: Starfighter 
Length: 42 meters 
Skill: Space transports: 344 Light Cruiser 
Crew: 4, gunners: 4, skeleton 2/+10 
Crew Skill: Space transports 4D, starship gunnery 4D, 
starship shields 3D 
Passengers: 10 (troops); 6 (prisoner cells) 
Cargo Capacity: 150 metric tons 
Consumables: 3 months 
Cost: 375,000 credits 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Hyperdrive Backup: x10 
Nav Computer: Yes 


Elrood Sector Overview 


Maneuverability: 2D 
Space: 9 
Atmosphere: 400; 1,150 KMH 
Hull: 5D 
Shields: 2D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 30/1D 
Scan: 60/2D 
Search: 90/3D 
Focus: 4/4D+1 
Weapons: 
Four Laser Cannons 
Fire Arc: 2 front, 2 turret 
Crew: 1 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 3D - 
Space Range: 1-3/12/25 
Atmosphere Range: 100-300/1.2KM/2.5KM 
Damage: 5D 


Capsule: The Last Thing is an old Imperial light 
cruiser captured through clever deceit and a well- 
executed plan. Dorok has made extensive modifica- 


Elrood Sector Overview ————————————— PA Wes 
-——————————————M ———— NM 


tions to it. The name comes from Dorok: "My ship is 
the last thing my victims see." 


m Dorok's Scout Ships 
Craft: Tykannin Drive Redthorn-class scout ship 
Type: Modified scout vessel 
Scale: Starfighter 


Length: 24 meters 
Skill: Space transports: Redthorn-class scout ship 
Crew: 2 
Crew Skill: Space transports 5D, starship gunnery 4D« 1 
Passengers: 2 
Cargo Capacity: 10 metric tons 
Consumables: 6 months 
Cost: 55,000 credits 
Hyperdrive Multiplier: x2 
Hyperdrive Backup: x15 
Nav Computer: Yes 
Maneuverability: 1D 
Space: 5 
Atmosphere: 295; 850 KMH 
Hull: 3D-2 
Shields: 1D 
Sensors: 
Passive: 30/0D 
Scan: 50/1D 
Search: 15/2D 
Focus: 5/3D 
Weapons: 
One Laser Cannon 
Fire Arc: Front 
Crew: Pilot or co-pilot 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range: 1-3/12/25 
Atmosphere Range: 100-300/1.2KM/2.5KM 
Damage: 4D 
Capsule: Dorok owns eight stolen scout ships. The 
vessels have been modified according to Dorok's 
instructions. 


Bounty Hunters 


Elrood Sector is an area that plays host to 
several bounty hunters. Despite the presence of 
a "refuge" world (Kidron), the dangers of openly 
hunting individuals on Kidron discourages much 
action on that world. Bounty hunters most com- 
monly frequent Coyn (becauseit is a major cross- 
roads in the sector) and Elrood (because it is a 
major trade route on the world). Aside from 
Grea, there are few experienced bounty hunters: 
those few bounty hunters who do comb the 
space lanes of the sector tend to be on the 
amateur and inexperienced side. 


Grea The Orfite 


Grea the Orfite is Elrood Sector's "patron 
bounty hunter": sheisthe most famous and most 
experienced of those who regularly operate in 
the sector. This wizened Orfite has "served" 
Elrood Sector for over two decades. She has 
tenaciously guarded her territory, and in her 
years of bounty hunting, has had few failures. 

A middle-aged Orfite with the characteristic 
large nose, Grea stands at just under 1.5 meters, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


—S$Ti 
-WA 


ARa EIFOOd Sector Overview 
eS aa 


Elrood Slang 


Elrood Sector, much like other regions of the galaxy, 
has its own slang. Although each world has its own 
unique phrases and words, these slang terms are fairly 
common and well-known in most areas. While they may 
have fallen out of favor, or never have been very 
popular, most people will know and understand these 
phrases. 


Almosters: Residents of Lanthrym, which almost won 
a coveted spot on the E-D Run. Warning: Lanthrymers 
do not like to be reminded of this. Using this phrase 
around them is likely to provoke a fight. 


Blackheads: Imperial officers. Named for the black 
caps they wear. 


Businessman: A smuggler. 


Chirps: Any droid that communicates through elec- 
tronic languages of beeps and whistles and cannot 
speak Basic. 


Dreamers: The Rebel Alliance. While the Elroodians 
would love tosee the Empire fall, they think the Alliance 
is a pipe dream. 


Drift, The: A huge cloud of gas that spans much of the 
sector. It is reputed to be extremely dangerous to 
navigate and there are no known hyperspace routes 
through the region. 


E-D Run: Nickname for the Elrood-Derilyn Trade Route. 


Extreme, The: The section of the E-D Run that is under 
Imperial control, running from just beyond Torina to 
Derilyn. So named due to the belief that anyone travel- 
ling the run from Derilyn to Torinais extremely unlikely 
to make the run without being boarded or harassed by 
the Empire. 


Finally Made His (Her) Fortune: The person died. 
Normally used as biting sarcasm. 


Flying Rocks; Ore carriers. 

Flying Triangles: Imperial Star Destroyers. 

Gate, The: Coyn, the closest planet to the rest of the 
galaxy. 

Gnats: Also “Swarm of Gnats." TIE fighters. 

Grunts: Gamorreans. Derisive term. 

Guest: Someone taking refuge on Kidron. 


Helping the Emperor: Someone who has been seized 
by the Empire and forced to work in the mines of 
Imperial Mining. 


His Imperial Travesty: The Emperor. 


Krilhead: A stupid person. Named for the unintelligent 
bovine creatures that act as the chief source of meat for 
the sector. 


Link, The: The informal sector-wide network of 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


gossippers that passes unofficial secrets and rumors 
that the mainstream media will not touch. 


Proties:Short for protocol droids, thisisaderisiveterm 
for anything (or anyone) that is perceived as useless. 
Race the Run: Go from one end of the E-D Run to the 
other. 

Race the Run Adrift: Same as above, but the pilot 
actually made it to Derilyn. 

Rock Chewers: Miners. 

Roods: Anyone born or having lived most of their life in 
the sector. 


Rulebook: Also "Law Book." A blaster. Describes the 
many beings who must take the law into their own 
hands, and enforce it at blaster point. 


Run, The: NicknamefortheElrood-Derilyn Trade Route. 


Self Service: Pirates. In essence, they help themselves 
to others' ships and the cargoes within. 


Shags: Wookiees. Generally used affectionately, but 
can be derisive. 
Shoot the Stars: Engage hyperdrive. 


Stopshort: The planet Torina, which is the last planet 
before Derilyn. Torinais onestop short ofthe end ofthe 
Run. 


Taken Up Mining: Someone who tried to complete the 
E-D Run, but was caught by the Empire. 


Ticktils: Bilars and any other "cute" species. A pronun- 
ciation of TCTL, which stands for "Too Cute To Live." 


Toz: The chief grain found on Merisee, which has been 
transplanted to many of the other worlds in Elrood 
Sector. It is used in breads, mushes, flour, and brewed 
into utoz, a popular alcoholic beverage. 


Tozzed: Drunk. 

Tracers: Bounty hunters. 

Unluckies: Term for people who are not from Elrood 
Sector but now find themselves there. 

Utoz: À very popular drink brewed from fermented toz 
grain. 


Utozz: À brand of Utoz, created by the Utozz Prime 
Brewery Corporation, the largest and oldest brewery 
on Merisee. 


Wet-dock: As opposed to dry-dock, where ships are 
repaired, a wet-dock is a bar. 


What's the Trouble?: How much does this cost? What 
is the price? 
White Wonders: Stormtroopers. Derisive term. 


29 


Elrood Sector Overview ——————————»Ó—— —— P Ü A i 
cr——M——— ————————————— —-————————————————— 


She does not look like a dangerous bounty hunter 
—which sheusesto her advantage. An Orfite scent 
mask is always within easy reach. 

Grea was born on Kidron. She left her home 
planet as soon as she was able. Her years as a 
drifter yielded impressive results: she won a small 
ship from a gambler and picked up her military 
skills while ferrying a group of mercenaries around 
the nearby Methall'has Sector. 

Grea is ruthless and amoral, but pragmatic and 
honest. Oncesheis hired to find someone, nothing 
can shift her focus. While she will consider any 
task, regardless of the moral implications, she is 
true to her word and will not lie to a client. Her 
objective is simple: to make as many credits as 
possible. 

Like all Orfites, Grea can use her highly devel- 
oped sense of smell to track people, determine 
what sorts of things were in a room (provided 
those things give off any sort of scent), and even 
fight in total darkness unhindered. For tracking her 
quarry, Grea relies on a combination of a network 
of informants plus her keen senses. 


The Neverquit 


Grea's ship, the Neverquit, is a small, custom- 
built vessel from the Coyn Shipyards. It is the 
only one of its kind, though the schematics exist 
to build more. The vessel looks likea dagger, with 
the engines set into the “handle.” It has a belly- 
mounted laser cannon turret. The entire vessel is 
black. The appearance of the Neverquit has be- 
come a harbinger of bad luck to local spacers. 
"Neverquit's nearby, someone's gonna die" is the 
litany often repeated when the ship is sighted. 


ARS 


m Grea The Orfite 
Type: Orfite Bounty Hunter 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 5D+2, blaster: heavy blaster pistol 8D, blaster: 
repeating blaster 7D, brawling parry 5D+2, dodge 8D+1, 
firearms 7D+1, melee combat 5D+2, melee parry 5D, pick 
pocket 4D+1, thrown weapons 4D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Alien species 6D, bureaucracy 5D, intimidation 7D+2, 
languages 5D+2, law enforcement 4D+1, planetary sys- 
tems 4D, streetwise 5D, streetwise: Elrood Sector 7D, 
survival 6D, value 5D, willpower 7D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Astrogation 4D, communications 3D, ground vehicle op- 
eration 4D+2, repulsorlift operation 3D«1, sensors 3D, 
space transports 6D+1, starship gunnery 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Bargain 6D, command 5D, con 7D, gambling 4D+2, hide 
5D+1, investigation 6D, persuasion 6D«1, search 9D+1, 
sneak 6D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 8D, stamina 6D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Blaster repair 3D, computer programming/repair 4D, first 
aid 4D+1, security 6D, space transports repair 4D-1, 
starship weapon repair 3D+2 
Special Abilities: 
Olfactory Sense: Orfites add +2D to search when tracking 
someone by scent or when otherwise using their sense of 
smell. They can operate in darkness without any penal- 
ties. Due to poor eyesight, they suffer -2D to search, 
Perception and related combat skills when they cannot 
use scent; they also suffer a -2D penalty for targets over 
five meters away. See Orfites under the entry for Kidron. 
Character Points: 13 
Move: 12 
Equipment: E-web repeating blaster (8D), heavy blaster 
pistol (5D), blast vest («1D against physical attacks, +1 
against energy), comlink, datapad, medpac, breath mask, 
Orfite scent mask, Orfite power harness 


30 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


m Elrood 
Type: Terrestrial plains 
Temperature: Temperate 
Atmosphere: Type | (breathable) 
Hydrosphere: Moderate 
Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Urban, plains 
Length of Day: 28 standard hours 
Length of Year: 364 local days 
Sapient Species: Humans 
Starport: 4 Imperial class, 1 private Imperial class, 8 
standard class 
Population: 6 billion 
Planet Function: Sector capital, manufacturing, trade 
Government: Representative democracy 
Tech Level: Space 
Major Exports: Starships, refined metals and ores, pro- 
cessed alloys 
Major Imports: Electronics, foodstuffs 
System: Elrood 
Star: Elrad (yellow) 


Name Planet Type Moons 
Trinka searing rock 0 
Acatal barren rock 0 
Elrood temperate plains 2 
Akana barren rock 1 
Thrang gas giant 7 
Tufar ice ball 0 


World Summary 


Elrood serves atriple role in its sector: capital, 
major manufacturing complex and trade center. 
The world is comfortable, with a pleasant climate 
and large landmasses within habitable zones. 
Due to its status as sector capital, Elrood is a 
busy world, bustling with starships and aliens 
from many species. 

The planet supports several immense urban 
megaplexes, and large factories dot the land- 
scape. Elrood is home to the largest free ore 
refineries in the sector (Derilyn has similar facili- 
ties, but its status as an Imperial occupied world 
prevent easy access to these plants). Most of the 
ore is brought here from mining worlds through- 
out the sector. Elrood’s chief exports are refined 


System Datafile 


Elrood system, star: Elrad, yellow sun. 
Six planets in system — third planet, Elrood, 
can support life. Others can support artifi- 
cial colonies. Elrood is the main system 
planet. 

Elrood is the capital of Elrood Sector. 
Heavy ship traffic ahead. Please turn ship’s 
comm to channel XTX984, local planetary 
spaceport control channel, for landing in- 
structions. 

ATTENTION TRAVELERS: This is Elrood 
Space Central. Welcome to Elrood. Please 
turn to channel XTX984 for instructions. 


metals, which find their way into buildings, 
starships, and processed alloys. 

Elrood has two moons: Sharene and Lodos, 
named after a prominent husband and wife who 
were with the first colonists many thousands of 
years ago. Both moons figure prominently in 
local culture and folklore. 


System Summary 


The Elrood system is located on the edge of 
the sector. Elrad, the system's sun, is a common, 
main sequence yellow star. Elroodis thesystem's 
third planet. 

Trinka, the closest planet to the sun, is a 
harsh, hot rock, and seems to lack any commer- 
cial potential, although there is a small Elroodian 
scientific outpost on this world. 

The second planet, Acatal, is another barren 
world, though it has a thin atmosphere (type II). 
There is a small mining facility here, owned by 
Radell Mining. 

Akana is the fourth planet. It is an unremark- 
able world with a trace atmosphere and almost 
no moisture. Aside from a few microbes embed- 


W/orld Map Terrain Key 


Plains 


Desert 
Swamp 


*  Craters 


^v Hills 


Forest 
Jungle/Rain Forest 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Barren Rock 


^. Mountains 


^ Volcano 


PE Water 
i Urban/Industrial 
City 

Spaceport 


t— Plateau 
<3 Canyon 


[ ] Ice 


Site of Interest 


31 


ARL 
ARS 


World Map of Elrood 


SOUTH ELROOD OCEAN 


Eastern 
Hemisphers 


ded inthe rocks, the world is barren. Akana could 
be terraformed, but it is an unnecessary expense 
at this time. Akana has a small, sealed artist's 
colony, a place of isolation where people can go 
to think in peace and solitude. The colony is 
subsidized by Elrood's government. Akana's only 
moon, Akanala, is a brilliant orb in the night sky 
and a source of inspirations for poems and sto- 
ries. Akanala’s brilliance is due to rich deposits 
of sparkling quartz, which causes the entire sur- 
faceto glisten. “Akanalais the diamond in Akana's 
sky" has to be the oldest, most overwrought 
cliché among the writers of Elrood, but it is 
nonetheless true. 

The largest planet in the Elrood system is the 
gas giant Thrang. From Elrood, it appears as a 
small, bright green globe the size of a man's 
thumbnail in Elrood's night sky. 

Tufar is the last planet in the system, and is 
little more than a frozen ball of ice and methane. 
The grimmest feature of the planet is an aban- 
doned listening post established when the sys- 
tem was first settled. After the incident that 
destroyed the station, the world took on a mys- 
tique of misfortune, and thus has been ignored 
since. Thelifesupport failed when a small meteor 
breached the airtight prefabricated structure. 
The six unfortunates who manned the station 
were flash-frozen at their posts and their corpses 
remain there to this day. 


LODON OCEAN 


Western 
Hemisphere 


Landing Procedures 


Whenever a ship approaches the system and 
switches to channel XTX984, the following proce- 
dure occurs. Because of the very orderly nature 
of the Elroodian bureaucracy, the same proce- 
dure is always used: 


"This is Elrood Starport Command. Incoming 
vessel, please identify yourself, and your inten- 
tions. Use standard protocol, please." 


Once identification and intentions are estab- 
lished, and the ESC sensors confirm the tran- 
sponder code, they run a brief check to make 
sure that the ship is not listed in Elrood’s records 
as wanted or stolen. Elrood is not directly tied 
into the Imperial databases, but it periodically 
receives updates when an Imperial patrol enters 
the system. As a result, minor offenses may not 
show up, but if the ship is wanted by the Empire 
for a major class one or class two infraction (as 
explained on pages 39-40 of Galaxy Guide 6: Tramp 
Freighters, or pages 21-22 of Galaxy Guide 7: Mos 
Eisley) the offense will almost certainly show up 
on their computer records. 

If the ship checks out on Elrood's records, a 
scan of the ship's engine performance is made, 
and it is given permission to land. Any variances 
at all from operating norms will result in the ship 
being required to have repairs done while on 
Elrood. Normally, most starports will overlook a 
few minor violations, but Elrood strictly enforces 
Imperial standards. The characters may be quite 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


med T A 
-WA 


surprised to find that they have many 
hours of work ahead of them or will 
have to pay out several hundred or 
thousand credits to get their vessel 
up to snuff. Of course, this proce- 
dure benefits the local shipwrights 
as well, but Elrood Starport Com- 
mand is not corrupt and isn’t doing 
this for personal gain — they are this 
strict because... that's what therules 
are, that’s why. Characters who are 
disgruntled by this turn of events 
can't simply decide to leave — this is 
clearly resisting law enforcement 
officials, which is a class three in- 
fraction. 


“Permission granted, (vessel 
name). When you land, please ob- 
serve all standard decontamination 
procedures. If needed, adecon team 
will be sent to your vessel to ensure 
compliance. We will need to see your 
shipping manifest and cross-verify it 
with your actual cargo. You will be 
required to show us your valid pilot's 
license and ship's ownership files." 


If the ESC has found any anomaly 
with the ship drives, they will be 
mentioned now. If requested, ESC 
will provide the names and Elrood 
Planetary Communication Net (EPCoN) numbers 
of recommended starshipwrights. ESC will also 
mention anything else that they feel may be 
wrong with the ship, such as an uninspired name, 
potential modifications (to increase safety), pro- 
cedures for securing and procuring cargoes on 
Elrood, the EPCoN numbers for the Elrood De- 
partment of Visitor Relations, Department of 
Tourism, and Department of Interstellar Trade. 


"Land at (name of starport and specific bay). 
Download code XP-445-T78Y, whichis beingtrans- 
mitted now, into your ship's computer upon 
coming within 50 kilometers of your starport 
destination. When activated, you will be linked 
with our navigation beacon and automated land- 
ing system. Safe landing, and enjoy your stay." 


The ship will receive a sophisticated com- 
puter code, which when loaded into the ship's 
navigation system, links it into Elrood's fully 
automated navigation and landing system. This 
system takes all ships under the control of 
Elrood's computer routing system, and ensures 
asafelanding. Manuallandings are prohibited on 
Elrood, and any character insisting on doing the 
piloting himself will receive a 300 credit fine. 

Ifthe ship or the crew is wanted for any serious 
infractions, or some other major problem has 


been discovered, several armed guards will be 
waiting at the landing bay to inform them of the 
problem, or in extreme cases, arrest them. 

Elrood Starport Command's security teams 
are immaculately dressed and thoroughly pro- 
fessional soldiers. They are dressed in spotless 
white uniforms (including white blast vests). 
However, these men and women are more than 
hired muscle — they are also public relations 
officials for the starport. In essence, they provide 
law enforcement, but they are also responsible 
for providing information, lending assistance, 
and they must be polite, helpful and charming at 
all times. Intimidation is not part of their training, 
although their sheer physical presence is intimi- 
dating enough, if need be. 


ESC Security Team. All stats are 2D except: 
blaster 6D, cultures 4D+1, law enforcement 6D, 
brawling 5D, security 5D. Move: 10. Blaster pistol 
(4D), armored vest (+1D to physical, +1 energy), 
datapad, and comlinks. 


If the characters decide to flee Elrood, engage 
in combat with other ships in Elrood space or do 
something to require their apprehension, they 
will have to face one or more Prosperity-class 
light cruisers. 


Elrood 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


33 


m Elrood Prosperity Cruisers 
Craft: Elrood StarYards Ltd. Prosperity-class Customs 
Cruiser 
Type: Light cruiser 
Scale: Capital 
Length: 300 meters 
Skill: Capital ship piloting: Prosperity-class light cruiser 
Crew: 100, gunners: 24, skeleton 35/+15 
Crew Skill: Astrogation 4D, capital ship gunnery 4D, 
capital ship piloting 4D, capital ship shields 4D, sensors 
5D 

Passengers: 40 

Cargo Capacity: 2,500 metric tons 

Consumables: 6 weeks 

Cost: 12 million (new), 7 million (used) 

Hyperdrive Multiplier: x1 

Hyperdrive Backup: x16 

Nav Computer: Yes 

Maneuverability: 3D 

Space: 9 

Atmosphere: 400; 1150 KMH 

Hull: 4D 

Shields: 2D 


Elrood ———————————————aum | 
——————————————————————— — 


ARS" 


Sensors: 
Passive: 50/1D 
Scan: 90/2D 
Search: 200/3D 
Focus: 10/4D 
Weapons: 
6 Heavy Turbolasers 
Fire Arc: 3 front, 1 left, 1 right, 1 back 
Crew: 2 
Scale: Starfighter 
Skill: Starship gunnery 
Fire Control: 2D+2 
Space Range: 3-15/35/75 
Atmosphere Range: 6-30/70/150KM 
Damage: 4D 
2 Tractor Beam Projectors 
Fire Arc: 2 front 
Crew: 6 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 1D 
Space Range; 1-5/15/30 
Atmosphere Range: 2-10/30/60KM 
Damage: 4D 
Capsule: The Prosperity-class Customs Cruisers, built 
by Elrood StarYards, Ltd., are popular amongst the 
worlds of the sector. While not exceptional combat 
vehicles and incapable of holding their own against 
Imperial fleet vessels, they are more than adequate 
for customs inspections, pirate actions and other 
common planetary defense activities. Elrood itself 
has two dozen Prosperities, with one assigned spe- 
cifically to each starport and the rest assigned to 
patrol and outer orbit customs inspections. 


Elrood Starports 


The starport most likely to be used by the 
characters will be Elrooden Starport. There are 
four Imperial class starports on Elrood, located in 
the megaplexes of Elrooden, Dinbar, Elraden and 
Lodos. A fifth Imperial class starport, Radell Cen- 
tral, is strictly for Radell Mining’s ore carriers. 
There are eight standard class ports toservesmaller 
cities. All Imperial class starports are assigned a 
Prosperity-class cruiser and several cloud cars. 
Because Elrood is a peaceful world, there is no 
need for extensive defenses, and thus there are no 
weapon emplacements around these areas. 

Elrood is a world that prides itself on appear- 
ances, and this naturally extends to its starports. 
The starports are an antiseptic white, and are 
kept spotless. There are no transients, drunks, 
con men, beggars, or otherriffraff here, and there 
are always plenty of security guards around ea- 
ger to lend assistance and enforce the law. The 
air is filtered, purified and mixed with perfumes 
for added comfort. There are countless protocol 
droids (for translation as well as information) 
and valet droids to carry bags and luggage, all of 
them polished to reflective brilliance. 


Typical Debarkation Procedure 
Once a vessel lands at its designated bay, a 
security squad approaches the vehicle with a 
customs official and a medical droid. First, the 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— TAA 
WA 


Elrood 


Cor USE. 2 2 


E Main- a TES 
= Terminal- 2: 


“Monorail - 


Holding 
gs Infirmary Storage 
Areas 


ge SON | (for lease) 
f dee: L| — || Security 
rares SNN The Pit 
Starport 
Control 
Administrative 


SN Restaurant 


pem To Monorail and To other Customs Areas 
other Customs Areas 


Stock 
Exchange 
| Passenger 
Terminal 
To Main 
Entrance 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 35 


ARS" 


MORRE 


Elrood Starport Main Regulations 


* Basic landing fee is 10 credits per 10 
meters of ship length. This includes decon- 
tamination fees. Berthingis 10% of the dock- 
ing fee per day. 

* Port customs fees are 1% of value (based 
on Elrood Customs standard assessments) 
of cargo to be delivered or to be picked up. 


* A fine of 20% of Elrood Customs standard 
assessments will be assessed on additional 
or missing cargoes when compared to the 
ship's manifest. 


* Ships must register with Elrood Starport 
Command prior to departure. A departure 
time and flight path will be assigned. In the 
event of a ship missing its departure time, 
the ship’s captain must file for a new depar- 
ture assignment. 


*Shipsareexpressly forbidden to discharge 
weaponry within Elrood System. Violation 
of this will result in fines and imprisonment. 


* Visitation fee is 5 credits per sapient (no 
fee for droids). 


* The following cargoes are contraband. 
Carrying them will result in seizure of cargo 
plus a fine of 4076 of the cargo's value. 
Failure to pay this fine will result in the 
impounding of the offender's ship. 


Cargoes: 

Weapons (special permits must be pur- 
chased before travelling to Elrood) 

Armor 

Unregulated ores (special permits must 
be purchased before travelling to Elrood, 
with the fee being 3% of the Elrood Customs 
standard assessment value) 


medical droid checks all crew members for dis- 
eases and parasitic infections. The crew is given 
a series of painless immunization injections to 
protect against any potentially dangerous dis- 
eases on Elrood. 

A small transponder, encoded with the user's 
unique cellular structure, is painlessly inserted 
under theskin on the back of each person's hand. 
The transponder identifies the person and certi- 
fies that the being has passed all immigrations 
and customs requirements. It will break down 
into harmless component substances after a 
month, so thereis no need to have it removed. All 
Elroodian law enforcement officials carry 
datapads which are equipped with scanners that 
can determine an individual's identity within a 
few seconds. 

Meanwhile, decontamination droids survey 


Animal species not indigenous to Elrood 

Spice 

Illegal or unregistered substances (spe- 
cial permits for prescription substances 
must be purchased before travelling to 
Elrood, with the fee being 5% of the Elrood 
Customs standard assessment value) 


Elrood Laws And Customs 


* The official language of Elrood, like that of 
the Empire, is Basic. 


* All ranged weapons are illegal on Elrood. 
No bladed weapon may exceed a length of 
10centimeters. Permits are required to carry 
any weapons — all permits must be ac- 
quired through Elrood Starport Permits 
Office (for visitors; residents must go 


through a different office) for a cost of 25 
credits per local week (eight days). Any 
carried weapons must be prominently dis- 
played. 


* Armor is prohibited on Elrood. 


* Nonsapient creatures must be either kept 
secured on board ship or restrained on a 
leash. 


* All droids must be fitted with restraining 
bolts. 


* Elrood has very strict standards of con- 
duct and behavior, and stiff penalties for 
violation of these laws. Off-worlders are 
advised to ask law enforcement officers for 
clarification of Elrood's legal system. Vio- 
lent behavior, smuggling, and sales of regu- 
lated items are serious offenses on this 
world. 


the ship's exterior and interior, eliminating any 
dangerous organisms. After the crew has been 
decontaminated and inoculated, the customs 
officer checks the ship's cargo manifest against 
the contents of cargo hold. The customs official 
then assesses docking fees and tariffs, which 
must be paid immediately. 


Spaceport Features 


The spaceport features a monorail station 
that moves the characters to Elrooden proper in 
a matter of a few minutes. Fare is one credit. 

For those who wish to travel Elrood Sector in 
luxury, the Elrooden Starport is the embark and 
debark point for Transsector Lines Ltd., a com- 
pany that runs passenger ships from Elrood to 
Torina. Ships leave at midday every other day, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


mpg ——/o9eerEeeoeim''''"""""''—-—————— 


WA 


and also stop at Coyn and Merisee. Each passen- 
ger vessel carries 150 passengers. Fare one way 
is 250 credits for standard passage, 1000 for 
luxury passage. 

For cargo traders and independent haulers, a 
location of primeimportance within the spaceport 
is an establishment called "The Pit." Despite its 
unpromising name, it isa bar and restaurant where 
independent cargo haulers, contractors, traders 
and others come to do business and exchange 
stories. Unlike many other taverns, the Pit has a 
relaxed and professional atmosphere, and like the 
rest of Elrood, it is a calm and orderly place. There 
is a five credit cover charge to enter. 

Inside, the Pit has a huge, sunken conversation 
pit (there are no seats in the conversation pit). 
Abovethe pit, at floor level, area number of booths 
where business can be conducted in private. The 
booth seats are programmed to conform to the 
anatomy and comfort of the occupant. Along the 
walls are data panels showing ship arrivals or 
departures, and available cargoes. 

The conversation pit is usually bustling with 
pilots and shipping agents. Pilots try to outbid 
each other to carry cargo, while the shipping 
agents try to hunt for the best bargains. The 
conversations are often lively. 

Characters can get a job hauling freight if they 
hustle enough cargo merchants over the course 
of a few hours. Make bargain, business or persua- 
sion skill checks to see how well they do. 

The Pit's main barkeep is Travis Chaz. Chaz 
has been here for about 30 years and has "seen it 
all." 


m Travis Chaz 
Type: Wizened Bartender 
DEXTERITY 2D+2 
Blaster 5D, brawling parry 5D, dodge 7D, melee combat 
6D, melee parry 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 6D, bureaucracy: Elrood 7D, intimidation 
6D, languages 7D, planetary systems: Elrood 7D+2, 
streetwise 5D+2, value 7D, willpower 6D 
MECHANICAL 3D+1 
Astrogation 4D+2, space transports 5D+1, starship shields 
4D«1, starship gunnery 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Bargain 5D, gambling 5D, persuasion 6D+2, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 7D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
First aid 4D 
Character Points: 8 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster carbine (5D, hidden under bar). 


Capsule: Chaz is a burly man in his mid-60's, though 
he has the health of a man 20 years younger. His hair 
is white as snow. He has several scars on his arms 
and face, and he walks with a slight limp. 
Everyone in the Pit at one time or another specu- 
lates about Chaz's past, mostly because Chaz won't 
say anything about it. Some say he was a Jedi Knight 
or a former Republic Senator, while still others 


suggest he was a pirate or bounty hunter. 

Chaz is a no-nonsense, quietly friendly man. His 
vocabulary is quite extensive, betraying a high 
degree of intelligence that belies his profession. 

Chaz knows about the illegal landing field, which 
customs officials are easily fooled, how to get black 
market goods, and which employers are the most 
honest. If he likes someone, he will quietly take care 
of them by pointing out less reliable prospective 
employers or employees. 

Chaz also knows a lot about the whereabouts of 
different personalities that haunt the Elrood Sec- 
tor. This information he does not give out easily. 


Smugglers’ Strip 


Despite strict regulations on the part of 
Elrood’s government, the smuggling tradeis alive 
and well on Elrood. Allincoming ships are brought 
down into the atmosphere over the mountains 
on the northern continent (roughly in the middle 
of the triangle formed by Dinbar, Elrooden and 
Radell Central), where they are instructed to 
travel at a 10,000 meter flight ceiling. However, 
sensor readings do not cover the entire region, 
so for a substantial portion of the journey to any 
of these cities, ships are unobserved. 

Several years ago, the enterprising crime car- 
tel of Lud Chud built a small, isolated landing 
station deep in one of the mountain valleys. Now 
known as “Smugglers’ Strip,” this area is about 
1,500 kilometers northeast of Elrooden. The ac- 
tual facility itself is a simple level patch of ground 
with several memory-plastic “temporary” shel- 
ters on the mountainside — to the casual eye, 
this could be a homestead or small farm. Instead, 
below ground level, there are vast underground 
storehouses for keeping contraband weapons, 
spice, medicines and any other materials that are 
smuggled onto Elrood (many items are smuggled 
in simply to avoid the tariffs). The area around 
the facility has carefully placed sensor bafflers to 
disguise the presence of the underground han- 
gars andany trace emissions left from the comings 
and goings of starships. 

Smugglers’ Strip is a smooth operation — a 
ship landing can be unloaded of contraband, be 
refueled and be back on its flight plan within the 
span of a few minutes. With careful high speed 
flying, a ship can arrive at a starport on schedule 
so that the automated flight system or flight 
controllers have no idea that the ship even 
stopped. 

The field itself always has half a dozen mob 
musclemen, and usually a more “refined” repre- 
sentative of the mob, who provides payment and 
otherwise ensures that deals are completed. 
Landspeeders are available to bring cargo into 
the cities, where it is sold on the black market. 

Lud Chud realizes that Elrood Space Central is 
very efficient. He is very careful about doing 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


37 


38 Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


7, eee 


WA 


business at the strip. Only a few ships per month 
areallowedto land here. As a result, black market 
prices are five times higher than standard cost. 

Finding a black market dealer is a Very Diffi- 
cult streetwise task, and takes two hours per 
attempt. Among the likeliest locations is Elrooden 
proper and the Pit. 

In order to get in on the smugglers' scam, the 
characters must first prove themselves trust- 
worthy to Lud Chud or one of his subordinates. 
Normally, a crew is also expected to pay a 500 
credit "sign-on" feeto be brought into the organi- 
zation, and from then on the crew must follow 
Lud Chud's orders or risk his wrath. 


Average Mob Muscle. All stats are 2D except: 
blaster: blaster rifle 6D, melee combat 5D, brawling 
6D, streetwise 5D. Move: 10. Blaster rifle (5D), 
vibroblade (STR+3D), comlink, landspeeder (one 
speeder per four mobsters). 


Elrooden 


Elrooden is the capital city ofthe planet Elrood. 
A huge, sprawling megalopolis, Elrooden and 
vicinity is home to 100 million. Elrooden has 
never had a centralized plan, so the city has 


sprawled out over countless square kilometers. 


in an odd mixture of residences, businesses, and 
factories. Clusters of huge buildings tower over- 
head, creating artificial canyons below, where 
private residences, multi-story residences and 
small businesses crowd for space. Many of the 
buildings have underground levels, and there is 
an elaborate underground repulsor rail trans- 
portation network linking major portions of the 
city. Above ground, the city has the monorail 
network, which has several main lines (including 
the link to the starport) as well as countless 
minor lines for commuters and casual travelers. 
There is a major repulsor highway network for 
personal vehicles, as well as several 
airspeederways, which are patrolled by cloud 
cars and marked by computer-monitored naviga- 
tion buoys. 


Radell Mining Corporation Building 


This building, the tallest on Elrood, resembles 
a needle, with a wide base tapering to a point. 
With the stylized symbol of Radell Mining on its 
northern face, there is no doubt that this is 
Radell’s corporate headquarters. Near the cen- 
ter of the city, the building is unusual in that it is 
surrounded by a large park (privately owned by 
Radell but open to the public). The building has 
a grand entranceway, with a wide set of polished 
white bodrite stairs over ten meters tall. The 
building has a large elevated and covered walk- 
way (nearly 300 meters long) that connects to the 
major monorail station across the boulevard 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


that seals off the park. 

Radell is an ever-present facet of life on Elrood 
(for which the local people are thankful, since it 
has enabled them to maintain a decent standard 
of living). Whenever on Elrood, the characters 
will notice the Radell logo and the company 
colors, navy blue and tan, everywhere. This is 
particularly true within the Radell complex, where 
the logo and colors are prominently displayed on 
walls, on uniforms and just about anywhere else 
that can be imagined. 

The building itself contains offices, meeting 
rooms and accommodations for travelers, guests 
and freelance workers in the temporary employ 
of Radell. When characters are supposed to re- 
port directly to Radell headquarters, they come 
here. Radell has its own security forces to patrol 
the building and the grounds. 


Radell Security Guards. All stats are 2D ex- 
cept: blaster 4D, dodge 4D+2, command 4D, Strength 
3D+2. Move: 10. Blaster pistol (4D+2), blast vest 
(+1 energy, +1D physical), blast helmet (+1 en- 
ergy, +1D physical). 


Elrood Bazaar 


The Elrood Bazaar is not only the largest mar- 
ketplace on Elrood, it is the largest in the whole 
sector. Within the confines of the bazaar, tourists 
find an endless array of shops (large and small), 
offering every imaginable (but legal) product — 
starships, droids, language disks, holograms, 
clothing, souvenirs, furniture — almost anything 
can be found here. 

While Elrood Bazaar is far from the most larg- 
est facility of its type in the galaxy, it is nonethe- 
less impressive to tourists who travel from 
throughout the sector to visit here. Aside from 
the endless array of shops and services, the 
bazaar contains restaurants for every income 
level, the Elrood Sector Stock Exchange, 
landspeeder rental and retail locations, a cul- 
tural and entertainment park with rides, virtual 
simulations and hologram experiences, and large 
traditional picnic parks. Aside from conspicuous 
consumption, the bazaar's choices are so di 
verse that it is as much recreational facility as 
shopping area. 

The facility is huge — the Grand Plaza, or 
Daya, is over three kilometers across. Between 
the Daya and the ring of permanent shops sur- 
rounding the area, called the Perma, there are 
literally a million different businesses. The ba- 
zaar has both a monorail station and immense 
underground parking facilities (the main 
speederway linking the starport and the capital 
city passes near the bazaar). 

The entire bazaar is open day and night, year 
round (although many of the smaller businesses 
shut down for the night). The Daya features 


M 
AO 
ug 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— Rs § 1 OO 


oddities, prepared food, small items, live enter- 
tainment, and unusual bargains. During the day, 
the Grand Plaza is choked with crowds buying, 
selling, and haggling for their choice of goods. 
The Perma’s stores are generally much larger 
and feature the more upscale and exclusive goods: 
vehicle, droid and starship dealers dominate 
much of this area. 

Many of the companies found in the Elrood 
Sector have branch offices in the bazaar, ranging 
from large, retail stores to one room offices with 
only a representative and computer. 

Of course, the Elrood Bazaar isn't as clean and 
wholesome as the local government would pre- 
fer. Whilethere are many undercover agents who 
scour the area looking for black market dealers 
and pick pockets, these elements are a fact of life. 
Characters who want illegal goods should make 
a Difficult streetwise check (roleplay these scenes 
out). At night, characters may find themselves 
jostled, and their wallets lifted. There are a very 
small number of actual assaults and armed rob- 
beries — certainly not enough to give people 
pause about going out at night. Like Radell and 
the Starport, Elrood Bazaar has its own private 
security teams. 


Elrood Bazaar Security Guards. All stats are 
2D except: blaster 3D+1, dodge 4D, languages 
3D+1, Strength 3D«2. Move: 10. Hold-out blaster 
(3D+2), blast vest (+1 energy, +1D physical), 
comlink, datapad. 


Hereis alisting of some of the more prominent 
companies in the bazaar: 


Radell Mining: The largest mining interest in 
the sector, Radell sells refined ores and metals. It 
also produces some finished goods. This office is 
more of a showcase for Radell's contributions to 
Elrood society (a public relations exercise), while 
showing off some of the novel and famous projects 
in which Radell metals and ores have been used. 
Major contractors sometimes approach Radell 
through this office. 


Delat Personal Electronics: A small Elrood 
company, Delat makes consumer goods such as 
chronometers, datapads, location transponders, 
comlinks, droid restraining bolts and holographic 
projectors. 


Ganrite Yards of Elrood, Inc.: Asmall starship 
manufacturing company based on Elrood, 
Ganrite’s product line consists of “clones” of 
other companies’ established designs. Their most 
common vessels are small freighters and per- 
sonal transport craft, and their most popular 
modelis the Ganrite Bratillia light freighter, which 
is basically a knock-off of the venerable SoroSuub 
StarMite light freighter. 


Transsector Lines: Transsector’s corporate 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


headquarters are in Dinbar, and this small trans- 
port line serves all of Elrood Sector, with infre- 
quent trips to nearby sectors. Transsector is the 
most reliable line in the sector and also the oldest 
(in fact, Transsector's founder was one of the 
navigators who helped plot the Elrood-Derilyn 
Trade Route). Prices and service are modest, and 
reservations can normally be made within six 
hours of departure. 


Professiona Artists Guild: The guild has a 
small booth area in the Daya, where the most 
popular and critically acclaimed works of guild 
members are on display. There are several sand 
casting sculptures, holographic paintings and 
interactive mood chambers, but the most fa- 
mous (and popular) display is “The Lovers’ Di- 
lemma,” a mixed media mood chamber and holo- 
graphic painting by Walls, a brilliant but tem- 
peramentalartist whose works are widely sought. 
The name "Professiona" was selected as a way of 
suggesting an exotic and cultured image. For 
those who are interested in studying with the 
masters, literature and holos on the various pro- 
grams at the Akana colony are available. 


Mercenary Guild of Coyn: The Coynite mer- 
cenaries are famous throughout the sector for 
their competence and skill. Those who need the 
services of the mercenaries may inquire about 
contracts at this location, although anyone who 
goes through here will be scrutinized by Elrood's 
government. Anyone who wants illegal services 
performed is likely to be arrested by Elroodian 
security officers. 


Ekkar Armaments: The prime business for 
Ekkar is the sale of short-bladed knives (since 
these are the only weapons that may be legally 
possessed on Elrood). Characters without 
weapon permits must also complete an applica- 
tion for a permit, since a weapon may not be sold 
without one. Characters may also purchase any 
kind of legal weapon here for delivery on Coyn, 
Ekkar's corporate headquarters. 


Orfa Olfactory Entertainment, Ltd.: Oría's 
trade is the relatively untapped field of olfactory 
entertainment. Of course, scent is the primary 
sense for the Orfites of Kidron, but this company 
has finally branched into olfactory products for 
Humans and other species. At this time, Orfa's 
products are a hot novelty item, and they are 
quite popular among the trend-setting youth of 
Elrood. 


Attakril Meats: This Kidron-based company 
sells meats in bulk quantities to restaurants and 
chain grocery stores, as well as choice cuts of 
meats for individuals. Attakril has made an effort 
to produce food packages for every budget, and 
buying directly from the company means big 


savings for the consumer. 


Tozzin Foods: Like Attakril, Merisee-based 
Tozzin Foods sells to restaurants, grocery stores 
and individuals. Their products include a wide 
range of bread and grain products, unique veg- 
etable products and pastries. 


Utozz Prime Breweries: Makers of the ever- 
popular (or at least common) Utozz, this com- 
pany sells to major markets and private consum- 
ers through this location. 


Torina Discount Electronics, Inc.: Torina Dis- 
count Electronics, Inc. is smaller than Quality 
Electronics of Torina, but it produces much higher 
quality products. In fact, Torina Discount is widely 
regarded as acompetitive local brand, and many 
Elrood Sector residents will purchase the 
company’s products, despitea higher price, over 
quality products of companies from other re- 
gions of the galaxy. Torina's prime focus is home 
consumer goods such as holographic projec- 
tors, entertainment centers, simple home com- 
puters and kitchen appliances. 


History 


The planet Elrood was colonized by the Old 
Republic thousands of years ago. The first set- 
tlers found a world rich in basic natural resources 
— plenty of flora and fauna, a breathable atmo- 
sphere, good water, rich soils for crops, and 
some mineral deposits for mining and construc- 


tion. The name Elrood was chosen to recognize 
the senator who had fought for the funding for 
this colonization effort. 

Slowly, settlements blossomed into towns and 
cities, while more and more colony ships arrived 
over the centuries. Elrood had little to offer the 
machines of industry. However, for those who 
wanted a simple life of hard work and a decent 
place to raise a family, the world was ideal. 

As Elrood's population grew, so did its power 
and prestige. Eventually, a colony was estab- 
lished on Derilyn, marking the first trade route in 
this region. In short order, the Coynites, Orfites, 
Meris and Teltiors were discovered, and diplo- 
matic relations were established with these 
worlds. In time, the E-D Run was pioneered and 
Elrood became a sector capital, with full accep- 
tance in the Republic. 

Elrood, always keenly aware of its Republic 
heritage, was a staunch supporter of the old 
order. When Palpatine took power, many were 
swept up in the emotions and promises of 
Palpatineand hoped forthe best. However, Elrood 
changed little. The increased taxes were a bur- 
den, but life went on much as it had for centuries 
before. 

Now, Elrood is a world compliant in the hands 
of the Empire. Many of the people, especially 
those in industry, are dissatisfied with the Em- 
pire, as it has favored the huge galaxy-spanning 
corporations over smaller, regional companies 
such as Radell Mining. However, the Elroodians 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


—0 T AR Eoo 
C ————————————— — —QÀÍQÁ I€ÓÀ LÁ Qv 


WA 


are a pragmatic lot, and see the Rebel Alliance as 
a dangerous entity — a bunch of foolhardy revo- 
lutionaries who lack the ability to govern and 
cannot foresee the consequences of their ac- 
tions. 

Elrood keeps a nervous eye on Derilyn, ever 
fearful that the Empire may decideto crack down 
on Elrood and impose martial law. Elrood has 
several shipyards capable of producing military 
vessels, which may someday be in service to the 
Rebel Alliance. 


Moon Days 


Elrood's culture has several days of special 
significance tied to the phases of the two moons, 
Sharene and Lodos. The myth of Sharene and 
Lodos is tied into the folklore of the planet. 
Sharene and Lodos were original colonists, first 
married under the twin moons of Elrood. In time, 
the phases of the moons came to be associated 
with these two lovers, mirroring their lives: ever 
changing, always turbulent, yet no matter what 
happened, the two were together always. As 
many of the Elroodians are poets and romantics 
at heart, they have built this myth over thou- 
sands of years. 


The Lovers’ Embrace: Moons within one hand 
span ofeach other. During these times, Elroodian 
couples exchange little gifts and give each other 
love poems and stories. Couples take vacation 
time to be together, romance blossoms and mar- 
riages during these phases are traditional. This 
happens on three occasions per year, but the 
periods of lovers being together last for several 
days at a time. 


The Lovers’ Conflict: The moons are on oppo- 
site sides of the sky. Whether it is biological, 
psychological or some other unknown factor, it 
is known that violent crimes on Elrood are at 
their peak during these times. 


Akana and Its Moon 


Akana is the fourth planet, a desolate rock 
with an unbreathable atmosphere. The 
Professiona Artists Guild exists on this barren 
world, and is a frequent retreat for many of 
Elrood's artists. Elrood has long-maintained an 
artistic tradition, and many young and talented 
writers, artists, musicians and sculptors are tu- 
tored by masters. 

A small passenger ship makes the Elrood to 
Akanarun once à week, at a cost of 20 credits one 
way. Staying at the Akana retreat costs 10 credits 
a day, but compared to the cost of more tradi- 
tional training at galactic universities, the colony 
is a bargain. While this has never occurred, this 
colony would be an excellent location for a Jedi 
to train and meditate in peace. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Whenever Akana's moon, Akanala, reaches its 
full phase, the artist colony throws a wild party, 
with much revelry, romance, and displaying, read- 
ing or performance of everyone's work. 


m Crix Griff 
Type: Slippery Con Man 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Blaster 4D, dodge 4D+1, pick pocket 5D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 5D+2, cultures 6D, languages 4D+2, streetwise 
6D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 
Repulsorlift operation 2D+2 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Bargain 5D, con 6D+1, disguise 6D, forgery 5D+2, gambling 
4D+2, persuasion 5D«1 
STRENGTH 3D+2 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Security 4D 
Character Points: 7 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D+2), 800 credits, elec- 
tronic lock-picker (+1D to security) 


Capsule: Crix Griff is a slippery con man who has 
walked the shadows of Elrood's rather rigid society 
for many years. The fact that he is still loose on the 
streets is a testament to his inventiveness and 
subtlety. Griff is a Human of medium build, with 
thinning brown hair. He is a thoroughly nondescript 
man, which he uses to great advantage. He also uses 
a great many number of disguises, and can alter his 
appearance with ease. 

Griff can be found either in the Elrooden Starport 
orat the Elrood Bazaar, searching out easy marks for 
his con games. He takes any number of disguises, 
from the poor working man to the elegant, well-to-do 
tourist. He finds some way to make acquaintances 
with individuals who fit his needs, and simply and 
subtly learns about their background: home world, 
reason for visiting Elrood, favorite hobbies and other 
things that help identify a person. Then, he springs 
his trap. 

Sometimes, he simply fleeces these people of 
credits after befriending them. More often, though, 
he sets people up to take a fall for other criminals. 
Boss Kaggle or one of the other criminals will contact 
Crix, explaining that they need “fall men” for a mis- 
sion that they are undertaking. The fall men will find 
themselves accused of the crime, and eventually, 
enough damaging evidence will be discovered to 
have them blamed for the crime. Crix will sometimes 
make sure that damaging “evidence” will end up in 
the characters’ possession (actually, cleverly dupli- 
cated items of evidence, or sometimes Crix will be 
able to get items from the actual scene of the crime 
and plant it on the characters). In other cases, Crix 
will take the information he has learned about the 
characters and carefully feed it to “witnesses” to the 
crime and officials who are investigating the crime. 
Crixis sosmooth that people forget that they learned 
this information from the con man and simply asso- 
ciate this information with the characters. Between 
the evidence and the testimony of the witnesses, the 
characters end up with lengthy jail terms while the 
true perpetrators get away with the crime. 


Adventure Idea 


Radell Mining hires the characters and their 
ship to take a Radell junior executive to Torina, 
with a one day stopover at Coyn. The executive, 
a young man named Tevrin Dol, is an intense, 
materialistic, success-oriented, wealth-obsessed, 
obnoxious, high-energy individual — in other 
words, snide and arrogant. Tevrinis being sent to 
Coyn to negotiate with other corporate repre- 
sentatives over trade agreements — Radell will 
import more materials from other regional com- 
panies, and they will, in turn, take more refined 
ores from Radell for industrial use elsewhere in 
the galaxy. After that, Tevrin has to go to Torina 
and meet with local Radell executives and evalu- 
ate operations on that world. He is then sup- 
posed to return to Elrood with sensitive data 
detailing investments, production quotas, and 
profit and loss figures. 

On the characters’ ship, Tevrin wants luxury 
accommodations, and valet service. He will ex- 
pect to have one character as his personal atten- 
dant for the trip. Unfortunately, Imperial Mining 
has caught wind of the trip, and hires some 
independent spies to tail Dol and report on his 
activities. These spies have orders to intercept 
the vessel before it returns to Elrood. Imperial 
Mining wants the data, and has asked the pirates 
to get the information as quietly as possible — 
although that may mean a “random” murder or 
two of Dol's “body guards” (the characters) to 
disguise their infiltration of the ship. 


Adventure Idea 


A prospective employer wishes to talk with 
the characters at the Pit. The employer goes to 
great length to shield his face. While the em- 
ployer will not reveal this information, his story 
is that he is a Rebel agent on Elrood to make 
contact with a secret Rebel intelligence cell. The 
agent's transport off Elrood has been unavoid- 
ably detained and he must reach Coyn within the 
next 20 hours to reach his transport out of the 
sector. 

Of course, this won't be a smooth mission — 
the characters encounter a huge drunken alien 
pilot who confuses them for an enemy and 
promptly begins a brawl in the Pit. There is also 
a small group of local Imperial spies looking for 
the agent. 

Finally, a bounty hunter knows the agent's 
identity and intends to capture him and turn him 
over to the Empire for whatever reward is being 
offered. If the hunter discovers that the charac- 
ters are hooked up with the agent, he will break 
into their vessel and plant some contraband, 
then anonymously notify Elrood customs. When 
the contraband is found, the ship is grounded 
until the matter can be sorted out. Now that the 
characters are stuck on the planet, the bounty 
hunter can nab the Rebel agent and bring him to 
Derilyn. 


44 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


m Coyn 
Type: Terrestrial forest 
Temperature: Temperate 
Atmosphere: Type | (breathable) 
Hydrosphere: Moderate 
Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Forest, plains, mountains, marshes 
Length of Day: 20 standard hours 
Length of Year: 380 local days 
Sapient Species: Coynites (N) 
Starport: 5 stellar class 
Population: 800 million 
Planet Function: Homeworld, trade 
Government: Feudal garrison-state 
Tech Level: Space 
Major Exports: Lumber, weaponry, mercenaries 
Major Imports: Foodstuffs, high tech, metals 


System: Coyn 

Star Name: Coynek (orange star) 

Name Planet Type Moons 
D'Skar searing rock 0 
Coyn terrestrial forest 1 
Sat'Skar barren rock 0 
Ba'Har gas giant 5 
Tro'Har ice ball 0 


W/orld Summary 


Coyn (*land of conflict and blood") is a rela- 
tively flat, temperate planet covered with large 
tracts of woodland. Coyn has regular seasons, 
including a hot summer and a moist and cool 
winter. The poles are cold, with moderate ice 
caps. The equatorial regions are warm and hu- 
mid. 

Coyn is ruled by a militaristic sovereignty. The 
absoluteruleris theEn'Tra ("King-Master"), whose 
formal title is En'Tra'Sol'Tais'Tra ("King-Master of 
Law, Land and Cities".) The En’Tra, in turn, parcels 
out land to various noble families, called 
En'Tra'Ag' Tra ("King-Master's highest-servants"). 

Most of the nobility comes from families with 
a lasting martial tradition — the Coynites are a 
species of warriors and thus respect and follow 
those who prove themselves formidable war- 
riors. This system has lasted for thousands of 
years. The capital is in the city of En'Tra'Tal, or 
"King-City." 

The world bustles with trade, as it is the first 


System Datafile 


Coyn system, star: Coynek, orange star. 
Five planets in system—second planet, Coyn, 
is inhabited. Coyn is a major trade crossroads 
system in Elrood Sector. 


From the Coyn Bureau of Tourism: 

Youareapproachingthe planet Coyn, Gate- 
way of Elrood Sector, and homeworld of the 
proud and noble Coynite people. 

Coynis famous for its weaponry andis also 
home to the Mercenary Guild of Coyn, which 
boasts the mightiest warriors of this world. 
Our mercenary activities are famous through- 
out the galaxy. 

As our guests, you are expected to honor 
and obey the En'Tra'Sol, the King-Law. It is a 
legal system that has provided for our needs 
for thousands of years, and it is the standard 
of conduct by which ali are judged. 

As you approach our world, keep in mind 
the following things: 


* We are a warrior culture and value honor, 
valor, and loyalty. Cowardice and weakness 
are despised. 


* A weapon drawn must be used for a warrior 
to retain honor. 


* Warriors who have shown bravery in com- 
bat are respected, kindred spirits. 


* Never touch a Coynite with your bare hands 
unless that person has granted permission. 
This is a punishable crime. 


* Hollow threats, failure to defend oneself, 
falsely preparing one's weapon for combat, 
deception, thievery and dishonesty are pun- 
ishable crimes. One who displays these traits 
or acts in such a manner is branded af'harl, or 
“cowardly deceiver.” af'harl are “unseeable” 
in the eyes of the Coynites, and have no legal 
rights. They may be enslaved, beaten, mur- 
dered or dealt with in any way that a Coynite 
citizen sees fit. af'harl who have been en- 
slaved are property of that Coynite’s estate 
and thus are protected by and answerable to 
that Coynite. Coynites are responsible for the 
actions of their af'harl. 


* Allowing an opponent to surrender in com- 
batisonly permissibleifthat opponent swears 
tracc'sorr, or fealty. 


Enjoy your stay. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


45 


World Map of Coyn 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


world that most ships visit upon entering Elrood 
Sector. However, the rather brutal warrior cul- 
ture makes the world a dangerous place — expe- 
rienced spacers are normally very careful when 
dealing with the Coynites and their unique per- 
ceptions of justice. 


System Summary 


Coynek (“light of land of conflict and blood”) is 
an orange star that gives the skies of Coyn a pink 
and orange cast. D'Skar (“dagger”), the planet clos- 
est to the sun, is a small, nightmarish planet with 
frequent earth tremors and volcanic activity. 

Sat'Skar (“sword”) is a “sister planet” to Coyn, 
with a comparable mass. The world is extremely 
hot (due to increased levels of “greenhouse 
gases”) with a type Ill atmosphere. The only life 
forms are primitive fungi, bacteria and microbes. 

Ba'Har ("battle blade") is a multi-colored gas 
giant with five moons. Ba'Har has a small band of 
rings, the remains of a moon torn apart by gravi- 
tational stresses thousands of years ago. 

Tro'Har ("farthest blade")istheoutermost planet 
in the system and is an inhospitable ice ball. The 
Coynites have placed an automated: navigational 
beacon here to direct incoming traffic. 


Gateway to Elrood Sector 
Coyn is the crossroads of the E-D Run and the 
Coyn Route, the route leadingto other major trade 
routes inthegalaxy.Sincetheoccupation of Derilyn, 


Western 
Hemisphere 


the Coyn Route has become the major passageway 
to other sections of the galaxy, and thus Coyn is 
called the “Gateway to Elrood Sector.” 

Coyn’s starports, both orbiting and planetary, 
are popular stop-offs for fueling and supplies 
prior to leaving the sector. Ships coming into the 
sector often stop here because of the many cargo 
storage facilities. Often, galactic freighters sim- 
ply dump their cargoes here. Then, regional cargo 
lines pick up the cargo and deliver it to the other 
worlds along the E-D Run. 

Of course, there is much more than trade 
going through Coyn. Elrood's backwater status is 
an invitation to those who want to disappear for 
awhile. Accordingly, many bounty hunters (Grea 
included) and Imperial officials frequent Coyn. 
Violence is a major problem in the spaceports, 
due largely to the Coynites’ system of law. 


Coyn Starports 


To handle the great volume of traffic passing 
through the system, Coyn has five stellar class 
starports. The prime starport is Skraj'Tais, 
"Skyland." It is an orbiting space station capable 
of hosting hundreds of ships at a time. It is similar 
indesignto Kwenn SpaceStation and is the major 
starport for those who have no business on Coyn 
itself. 

The other four stellar class starports are on 
the surface of the planet. They are En'Tra'Tais 
("Kingland"), Im'Tra'Tais ("Princeland"), 
Ah'Kra'Tais (“Common-craftersland”), and 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


eee 


Kroyn'Tais, “Warriorland.” There is also a one 
standard class starport, Kra'Tais (“Craftersland”), 
which is a common destination for those pur- 
chasing goods from Coyn. Each of these starports 
is within major cities: En'Tra' Tal, Im'Tra'Tal, 
Ah'Kra, Kroyn'Tal and Kra. 

Characters may besentto any ofthe starports, 
although if they make it clear that they are just 
passing through, they will almost certainly dock 
at Skraj'Tais. The main Imperial base on Coyn is 
at Kroyn'Tais, although there is a minimal pres- 
ence in the system. 

The starports are similar in design, but 
En'Tra'Tais starport is the largest. The city of 
Ah'Kra has excellent medical, repair and resup- 
ply services. Im'Tra'Tais is the most luxurious 
starport. Each starport has two Prosperity-class 
defense ships, purchased from Elrood. 

Visiting ships are hailed by the Coyn'Skraj'Har 
(“Coyn-sky-blade,” or Coyn’s space fleet). The 
new arrival must declare what cargo is carried, 
intended business and requested length of stay. 
If the ship is here to pick up a specific cargo, this 
will be verified. Berthing fees are 50 credits a day, 
regardless of the starport. 

One good thing about Coynite starports is that 
once a ship berths, the Coynites take it upon 
themselves to be fully responsible for the ship's 
security.Starport security patrols the pads, mak- 
ing sure that no ship is broken into. 


StarportSecurity Guards. Dexterity 3D, blaster: 
blaster pistol 5D, Knowledge 1D, Mechanical ID, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Perception 3D, Strength 3D, brawling 5D, Techni- 
cal 1D. Move: 12. Blaster rifle (5D), coyn'skar 
(STR+2D), blast vest («1D physical, +1 energy). 


Coynites 

The Coynites are a tall, heavily muscled spe- 
cies of bipeds. Their bodies are covered with a 
fine golden, white or black to brown fur, and their 
heads are crowned with a shaggy mane. 

They are natural born warriors with a highly 
disciplined code of warfare. A Coynite is rarely 
seen without armor and a weapon. These proud 
warriors are ready to die at any time, and indeed 
would rather die than be branded af'harl. 

Coynites could conceivably live up to 250 
standard years, but their warrior culture results 
in an average lifespan ofamere53 years. Coynites 
reach physical maturity in their early twenties. 
Coynite children are born in var'sairk (capital- 
ized when referring to noble families; means 
"birth-group" or litter) of two to six children, and 
all children of a litter are of the same sex. 

Coynite appearance and conduct are tied to a 
rigid social code, the En'Tra'Sol. The length of a 
Coynite's maneis directly related to social status 
— the more respected and successful a warrior, 
the longer the mane and the more intricate the 
braids ofthat mane. Thetype of braid usedis also 
an indication of the Coynite's family and the 
Ag'Tra (ruling noble) that the Coynite swears 
loyalty to. 


m Coynites 
Attribute Dice: 13D 
DEXTERITY 2D/5D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D/3D+2 
MECHANICAL 1D/4D 
PERCEPTION 1D/4D+2 
STRENGTH 2D/5D+1 
TECHNICAL 1D/3D 
Special Skills: 
Mechanical skills: 
Beast riding: tris. All Coynites raised in traditional Coynite 
society have this beast riding specialization. Beginning 
Coynite player characters must allocate a minimum of 1D 
to this skill. 
Special Abilities: 
Sneak: Coynites get +1D when using sneak. 
Claws: Coynites have sharp claws that do STR+1D+2 dam- 
age and add +1D to their brawling skill. 
Intimidation: Coynites gain a +1D when using intimidation 
due to their fearsome presence. 
Story Factors: 
Honor: To a Coynite, honor is life. The strict code of the 
Coynite law, the En'Tra'Sol, must always be followed. Any 
Coynite who fails to follow this law will be branded af'harl 
(“cowardly deceiver”) and loses all rights in Coynite 
society. Other Coynites will feel obligated to maintain the 
honor of their species and will hunt down this Coynite. 
Because an af'harl has no standing, he or she may be 
murdered, enslaved or otherwise mistreated in any way 
that other Coynites see fit. 
Ferocity: The Coynites have a deserved reputation for 
ferocity (hence their bonus to intimidation). 
Move: 11/15 
Size: 2.0-3.0 meters tall 


Coynite Society 


The Coynites have a militaristic, feudal soci- 
ety. Warfare and aggression are considered es- 
sential to Coyn society. 

The planet is ruled by King Im'Toral XV and 
Queen, Em'Tora VIII. Below them arethe 29 Ag'Tra 
(*Nobles"), heads of the noble families of the 
world. Each noble family runs a Sarrh'Tais (“law- 
land"), so that the entire world is under control 
of the Ag'Tra, who are loyal to the king. 

Each Ag'Tra has at least 58 Kroyn, elite war- 
riors of exceptional honor and status. Each Ag'Tra 
sends one Kroyn to serve as the En'Tra's body- 
guard for one year. Thus, the En’Tra always has 
30 Kroyn as a personal elite guard (one from each 
noble's holdings and one from the king's own 
family or territory). 

The vast majority of noble families were so 
appointed thousands of years ago, although ev- 
ery few centuries, a new family will be added to 
the noble bloodlines by the En'Tra's decree. It is 
possible that a family may have its noble status 
stripped by decree of the En'Tra, but this has 
never happened. This is probably due to the 
likelihood that the dishonored family would at- 
tempt to unite disgruntled factions and lead a 
revolution — very few En'tras have felt secure 
enough in their power that they would risk a full- 
scale civil war. 


Coynites value bravery, loyalty, honesty, and 
duty. Coynites save displays of affection for their 
own families in private surroundings. 

Curses in the Coynite language include zee’tah 
(fear), mora’ga (weakness), kzah (poison), fa'tar 
(peace), and the worst of all: af'harl (cowardly 
deceiver). 

There are several greetings used in Coynite 
society, including “Sat’skars Kabar’Rattar” 
(‘Swords together, blunted in friendship”), 
"Sat'skars Kabar'Ba" (“Swords together, joined 
in battle”), a challenge to battle or a warning that 
animosity exists and great care should be taken 
or a challenge to combat will be made, "Sat'skars 
Fas'Tawws'Rattar ("Swords ended in honor and 
friendship," which means all conflicts have been 
satisfactorily resolved, thus we are friends) and 
"Sat'skars Fas'Ba" ("Swords ended in battle," 
meaning that there remain unresolved differ- 
ences that will not be forgotten). 

Coynites value long hair, since in their culture 
long hair is a sign of great combat ability and 
honor. Aliens with long hair or shaggy coats 
(such as Wookiees) are treated with respect. 
Beings who are bald (or hairless) are shunned as 
deformed beings. 

Jedi Knights are a source of fascination to the 
Coynites. On one hand, there is little doubt that 
the Jedi are formidable warriors with a code. 
However, Jedi are not supposed to simply rush 
into fights or provoke them; peaceful methods of 
resolving a conflict are preferred, and violence is 
a last resort. This code mystifies the Coynites, 
but they greatly respect their abilities and their 
adherence to their own strict code. 

Coynite names are morethan "mere" words — 
they are stories. By literally translatingthe mean- 
ing of the phrases, it is often possible to know the 
history of an item, or a person, or a location. The 
longer a name, the more honored a being is or 
more noble his family. However, Coynites sel- 
dom use their full names except when first estab- 
lishing who has higher standing, such as upon 
first meeting. As a concession to off-world cus- 
toms, Coynites will allow aliens to use shortened 
versions of names, but only if the alien confers 
theappropriatelevel of respect uponthe Coynite. 
To deride an object of great importance or be 
disrespectful is an unforgivable offense. 

When all syllables of a Coynite name are capi- 
talized, it means that the object, place or person 
is worthy of great respect. All things associated 
with the En'Tra are always capitalized. Likewise, 
proper names are capitalized. Some phrases or 
names are never capitalized — this indicates a 
relationship with af'harl (*cowardly deceivers"). 

When creating gamemaster characters, these 
traditions should be remembered. Many Coynite 
warriors of noble birth have very long names, 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


—ST,. 
WA 


which might be translated as "Trel'tak, honor- 
able warrior who defeated a noble of higher 
standing, of Clan Muls'rak, leaders of the War of 
Unification." 


The En'Tra'Sol (King-Law) 


Manythousands of years ago, the Coynites were 
divided into numerous warring clans. This, com- 
bined with their rapid technological development, 
resulted in a species that not only fought well, but 
excelled in weapon design and manufacture. 

Eventually, one Coynite clan learned how to 
manufacture biological weapons. Whether the 
action was accidental or intentionalis not known, 
but a dangerous toxin was eventually released. 
The microbe spread across Coyn, uncontrolled. 
The toxin was passed by physical contact — 
anything as simple as a touch of hands could 
spread the deadly organism. The plague killed 
over half of the planet's population. 

Toral, chief of the strongest clan, realized that 
the Coynite species was heading towards extinc- 
tion. He began a series of reforms with his allies 
and eventually succeeded in not only banishing 
biological weapons, but also instituted a code of 
law for the warrior society. Toral's leadership 
and wisdom united the warring clans under one 
law (the En'Tra'Sol) and one leader. During this 
time, the Coynites established the tradition of no 
personal contact without express permission 
first. The effect of the biological toxin was so 
pronounced that the ban on contact became part 
of the En'Tra'Sol. 

Under this law, clan infighting was not elimi- 
nated, but the scale of the conflict was greatly 
reduced. Toral's son, Arl'Toral managed to bring 
peace to the planet. Arl'Toral channeled his 
people's natural aggressiveness into a rigid code 
of conduct by revising the En'Tra'Sol. 

Shortly thereafter, settlers from Elrood first 
discovered Coyn. During these exchanges with 
the strangers from space, Arl'Toral realized that 
the best way to ensure peace on Coyn was to 
channel these aggressive energies to other pur- 
suits. In short order, the first Coynite mercenary 
units were formed. 

What follows is a summary of the En'Tra'Sol. 


* A Coynite's sratt ("word" or "promise") is his 
life. All speech, action and story are sratt; once 
given, it is eternally binding. One who breaks 
sratt may be branded af'harl. 


* Combatis thenatural order of life. Conflicts and 
disagreements must be settled openly in com- 
bat. 


* Anunsheathed or drawn weapon must be used. 
If a weapon is drawn in anger, it must be used. To 
not respond to a challenge, or to challenge or 
threaten idly is to be branded af'harl. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


* [t is forbidden to show mercy in combat. It 
eliminates the honor of victory in combat and 
removes the honor of he who is shown mercy, 
making them af'harl. Combat is to the death 
unless one swears tracc'sorr ("submission and 
blood-loyalty" or "fealty") to the other, in which 
case they become part of that Coynite's family. 
At the beginning and end of each combat, all 
survivors must acknowledge and salute the 
opponent's honor. 


e af'tah ("deception") or harl'tah (“cowardice”) 
are unforgivable sins. Use of kzah ("poison") is 
deception and cowardice. Challenging the in- 
jured or weak to combat is cowardice and is 
unforgivable. Those who deceive or show cow- 
ardice are branded af'harl. 


* One must unquestioningly obey all to whom he 
has sworntracc'sorr. All superior clan members, 
Ag'Tra and En'Tra are to be obeyed without 


reluctance or hesitation. Not to do this is to be 
branded af'harl. 


* One may only break tracc'sorr by publicly 
declaring fas’tracc’sorr, or “end of submission 
and blood-loyalty.” Superior clan members, 
nobles and, of course, the En’Tra, may challenge 
anyone doing this to combat. 


* Pain, sadness, guilt, regret, reluctance, or fear 
are emotions of af'harl and may not be expressed 
without losing all honor. 


* It is forbidden to touch another without first 
receiving permission. The penalty for this is death. 


* af'harl are no longer Coynites. af'harl have no 
rights, no property, no meaning. They are to be 
murdered, enslaved, or dealt with as any Coynites 
see fit. A Coynite may take responsibility for 
af'harl, but all actions of that af'harl are that 
Coynite's responsibility. 


The Assembly of the Ag'Tra 


There are 29 Ag'Tra (nobles) who answer di- 
rectly to the En'Tra. Of these 29, nine are sympa- 
thetic to the Empire, five are sympathetic to the 
Rebellion, and the remaining 15 areneutral. While 
subterfuges and behind the scenes skulking are 
not a permissible part of Coyn life, nobles are 
permitted to indulgein alittle political wrangling, 
and some of this involves setting up unfavorable 
circumstances for rival nobles, or even large 
battles with lopsided odds. Even so, if any hard 
evidence of such behind the scenes planning 


SSS oOo WARS 


comes to light, the noble will be branded af'harl. 
In an extreme case, the entire noble family may 
be branded af'harl, in which case a new family 
from within that territory will be selected to be 
the new noble bloodline. 


Unique Coynite Items 


Theseitems are available to off-worlders, Ekkar 
Arms of Coyn is the chief manufacturer and seller 
of these items. These weapons are hand-crafted 
by individual weapons’ masters, which explains 
their cost. 


m Coyn'skar 
Model: Ekkar arms coyn'skar 
Type: Coynite bladed pole 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 400 
Availability: 3 
Difficulty: Moderate (blade), Very Difficult (disarm with 
hook) 
Damage: STR+2D (blade), STR+2 (hook) 


Capsule: The coyn'skar is a pole weapon with a 
lengthy, sharp blade on one end and a hook at the 
base. The shaít is tooled in such a way as to offer 
maximum grip. The hook can be used to trip or 
disarm an opponent. 


m Sat'skar 
Model: Ekkar Arms sat'skar 
Type: Coynite sword 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 700 
Availability: 3 
Difficulty: Difficult 
Damage: STR«3D«1 


coyn'skar. Middle: Coynite battle armor. Bottom left: sat'skar. Bottom right: d'skar. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


WA 


Capsule: A Coynite sword, it must be used with 
both hands (if swung one-handed, damage is only 
STR+1D and the difficulty increases to Very Diffi- 
cult). The blade has grooves in it that cause terrible 
wounds. 


m D'skar 
Model: Ekkar Arms d'skar 
Type: Coynite dagger 
Skill: Melee combat 
Cost: 150 
Availability: 3 
Difficulty: Moderate 
Damage: STR+1D+1 
Capsule: A Coynite dagger, this is the most com- 
mon weapon among Coynites. These weapons are 
known for their fine craftsmanship and deadly 
blades. 


m Coynite Battle Armor 
Model: Ekkar Arms Coynite battle armor 
Type: Coynite personal battle armor 
Cost: 3,000 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: Adds «2D protection from all physical and 
energy attacks. All Dexterity skills are penalized -1D. 
Capsule: This bulky yet functional suit includes a 
helmet and is made from the stands of walt'sor 
plants, found only on Coyn. Despite the suit's rather 
humble origins, it provides excellent protection 
against physical and energy attacks. 


Coynite Companies 


Ekkar Arms: This is Coyn's chief manufac- 
turer of arms and armor. Whether it is Coynite 
native weaponry or blaster rifles, thermal deto- 
nators and vibro-axes, Ekkar's products are of 
the highest quality. As a result, all of Ekkar's 
merchandise costs 10 percent more than aver- 
age prices. However, in return, weapons such as 
blasters are easier to repair (one level of diffi- 
culty lower) and can withstand more punish- 
ment (consider «1D over normal body). 


Mercenary Guild of Coyn: This is the main 
Coynite mercenary organization, and it is offi- 
cially affiliated with the En'Tra. Each noble family 
is required to contribute a specific number of 
soldiers for mercenary service, and individuals 
areallowed to join at their discretion. The Merce- 
nary Guild of Coyn hires out its services to all 
legal organizations seeking military forces for 
legal activities. In other words, the mercenary 
guild may hire out soldiers to serve for the Em- 
pire, or to serve for a corporation, but the guild 
will not hire out soldiers to the Rebel Alliance. As 
Coyn is within the Empire, it will not risk a full 
invasion by the Empire — a hopeless fight isn't 
honorable. 

Warriors always have the option of rejecting 
mercenary missions, but no warrior has ever 
used this option, since it would result in lost 
honor. All warriors have sworn to defend Coyn 
and Coyn's interests in the event of attack. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Guild entry free is 100 credits and annual dues 
are 50 credits. The Guild gets 15 percent of the 
mercenary's pay. Weapons and armor can be 
purchased from the guild at a 10 percent dis- 
count. 

The Mercenary Guild is a venerable, trustwor- 
thy operation with a reputation above reproach. 
Mercenaries who violate their contracts, flee 
from a battle, turn on their employer, or other- 
wise commit treason or show cowardice are 
branded af'harl. In some cases, such as deser- 
tion, the guild will send other mercsto hunt down 
and execute the coward. The Mercenary Guild 
has offices on Elrood, Torina, Derilyn, and 
Lanthrym. 


Average Coynite Mercenary. Dexterity 3D+2, 
blaster 5D, brawling parry 4D, melee combat 5D, 
Knowledge 1D, survival 4D, Mechanical 1D, Per- 
ception 2D, Strength 5D+1, brawling 6D+2, Techni- 
cal 1D. Move: 10. Character Points: 3. Blaster rifle 
(5D), Coynite battle armor (+2D to all attacks), 
coyn’skar STR+2D (blade), STR+2 (hook). 


Rols'Kus ("Arena of the Games") 


The Rols'Kus (“arena of the games") is a 
250,000- seat amphitheater located in the capital, 
En'Tra'Tal. It is the site of the immensely popular 
kus’nar gladiatorial games of the Coynites. Since 
Coynites view these combats as sport, they are 
not to the death unless the loser is unwilling to 
submit to his opponent. Of course, most com- 
bats do last until one of the recipients receives a 
very serious injury, so most “cultured” beings 
view these combats as barbaric. 

There are games every night, and during holi- 
days, day-long contests and championships are 
held. As a rule, off-worlders are not usually fea- 
tured in these combats, Coynites view participa- 
tion in these games as an honor, and many young 
warriors focus their dreams on being named 
Tawws'Kroyn, “Most Honorable Champion War- 
rior." 

Most of the contests are brawling or melee 
combats, though there is a target shooting con- 
test for archaic guns, blasters, and bows. Each 
game is played in a series of elimination rounds. 
Thearenaitselfis climate controlled and equipped 
with a holo projection system so that each pa- 
tron has a perfect view of the action. 


Arquas Tais ("Land of Fallen 
Ones of Valor") 


Located outside the capital, this is a vast 
cemetery. Àn honor guard of four Coynites in full 
battle regalia always watches over the field. 

Here are buried all Coynites who have fallen in 
battle. Additionally, members of other species 
who have fought for Coyn or died in servicetothe 
Mercenary Guild are buried here. 


5 LLL 
ARS 


Coyn 


-— te 


e o 


52 Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— T I 
WA 


Zal Tuag Th'Trar, Junior Zal'Tra 


Type: Security Force Member 

DEXTERITY 4D 

Blaster 5D, brawling parry 6D«1, dodge 5D, melee combat 6D, 
melee parry 6D 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Alien species: Humans 4D, cultures 7D, intimidation 4D+2, sur- 
vival 5D, willpower 5D+2 


MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding: tris 6D 

PERCEPTION 4D+1 

Command 5D+1, persuasion 5D+1, search 6D+2 
STRENGTH 5D 

Brawling 7D«1 

TECHNICAL 1D 

First aid 2D, security 2D 

Special Abilities: 

Sneak: +1D to sneak. 

Claws; STR+1D+2 damage, +1D to brawling. 
Intimidation: +1D to intimidation. 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 12 

Equipment: Sat'skar (STR+3D+1), blaster pistol (4D), Coynite 
armor (+2D to all attacks, -1D to all Dexterity actions) 


Capsule: Zal Tuag Th'Trar is a 2.7-meter-tall robust 
youth of pure white coloring and a deep dark brown 
mane that he wears in an elaborately braided ponytail 
down his spine. A member of the Th'Trar clan, his father 
is a noble who is quietly sympathetic to the Rebels. Zal 
has chosen to acquaint himself with off-worlders who 
stand out from the normal rabble, learn their ways, and 
report the findings back to his father. Since Zal is young, 
heis not yet ingrained in the ways of his people, and thus 
is abit more flexible around non-Coynites, although heis 
characteristically self-righteous about his heritage. He is 
cocky, and enjoys pointing out how superior Coynite 
culture is over others. Young Zal is an enthusiastic 
warrior, an outgoing sort, who has a great natural curios- 
ity about off-worlders. Despite this, he is a friendly sort, 
and the perfect guide for characters. 


Coyn 


Zal Afreg Kt'Aya, Junior Zal'Tra 


Type: Security Force Member 

DEXTERITY 5D 

Blaster 6D+1, brawling parry 6D+1, dodge 6D+1, melee combat 
7D+2, melee parry 6D+2 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Intimidation 5D, survival 5D, willpower 4D 

MECHANICAL 2D 

Beast riding: tris 6D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Command 5D, hide 5D, search 6D, sneak 7D 

STRENGTH 5D+1 

Brawling 7D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D 

First aid 2D+1, security 3D 

Special Abilities: 

Sneak: +1D to sneak. 

Claws: STR+1D+2 damage, +1D to brawling. 

Intimidation; «1D to intimidation. 

Character Points: 6 

Move: 11 

Equipment: Sat'skar (STR+3D+1), blaster pistol (4D), Coynite 
armor (+2D to all attacks, -1D to all Dexterity actions) 
Capsule: Zal Afreg is a 2.8-meter-tall Coynite, with soft 
gray fur and a black and white streaked mane in two 
ponytails. Despite his soft color, Afreg is a muscular, 
towering specimen with steel blue eyes. 

Zal Afreg is of the Kt'Aya clan, whose head noble 
favors neutrality in the galactic civil war. Zal Afreg is the 
favored son of the oldest Var'Sairk. Zal Afreg is Zal Tuag's 
chief rival, as opposed to enemy, though he comes 
dangerously close to being one. Arrogant, smug, and 
somewhat of a bully, Afreg adheres to the En’Tra’Sol 
code so strictly that he has learned how to bend it just 
enough to torment others and get away with it. He lacks 
personal honor, but this has yet to be revealed. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


53 


AF 
ARS" 


Coyn 


: Blaster 3D, dodge 4D+1, melee parry 3D+2, pick pocket 6D+2, running 2D+1 
gren KNOWLEDGE 2D 
ON Alien species: Coynites 7D, bureaucracy 2D+1, languages 3D+1, streetwise 4D+2, value 
2D«1 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Beast riding 3D, hover vehicle operation 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Bargain 4D+1, con 5D+2, forgery 2D+2, gambling 3D, hide 3D+2, persuasion 3D«1, search 
4D, sneak 3D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 
Climbing/jumping 3D+1 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Computer programming/repair 3D, droid programming 2D+2, security 3D+1 
Character Points: 8 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Hold-out blaster (3D), comlink, glow rod, recording wand, dice, cards, 
other gambling implements 


Capsule: Tamaron is a Human in his late 20s. He wears a "lost-puppy" look on 
his face. He has sandy brown hair with a cowlick, which makes him look 
younger than he is. Tamaron was born on Lanthrym, and left as a teenager to 
serve on a freighter, lying about his age to get work. He has since settled on 
Coyn, where he enjoys the sport of dodging Coynite security forces. 

Having been born on the frigid iceball known as Lanthrym, Tamaron has 
sworn not only never to be cold and poor again, but also not to do an honest 
day's hard work in his life. Tamaron is not a cocky, swaggering con man. On 
the contrary, he appears to be just the sort of person others would take 
advantage of, and here is where his genius lies. Beings see Tamaron and feel 
they have nothing to fear, and grow overconfident. Tamaron then proceeds 
to bilk them of their savings. 

Tamaron has found that the busier Coynite spaceports have many inno- 
cent dupes who have just arrived from outside Elrood Sector. Usually, he 
represents himself as a guide to the planet or the sector, and will offer to show 
people around for a respectable fee. 

Although Tamaron is not above a little flirting with females, he has no 
interest in even a superficial relationship. To him, first he must make his 
fortune, then he will think of other things, such as women. Tamaron abhors 
violence and would rather run than fight. 


SSS eset” 
eon = ANASS SS 
RETEST SN 


BOSS 


Capsule: The tris is a huge, dun-colored, muscular, 
six-legged steed favored by the Coynites. From child- 
hood, each Coynite is taught how to ride a single 
young tris, which becomes the Coynite's compan- 
ion. The Coynite who rides the tris is called its 
kars'asruul ("soulrider"). From this point on, Coynite 
and tris are bonded spiritually. 

Mosttris havea mane, and itis grown and braided 


Noted Personalities 


Listed above and on the previous page are 
descriptions of some of the more interesting 
Coynites characters might encounter. 


Creatures of Coyn 


22 iMod Domesticated Riding Animal to match that of its owner. Many Coynites also 

DEXTERITY 4D decorate their tris with painted runes telling of the 
Running 5D rider’s accomplishments. Tris are intelligent, fero- 
KNOWLEDGE 0D cious, and headstrong. They are very difficult to ride, 
Intimidation 5D except by its kars’asruul. 
PERCEPTION 3D Tris are carnivores, as evidenced by their fangs. 
Search: tracking 5D These huge teeth, coupled with the shaggy manes 
ignes 5D and blood red pupil-less eyes, make for a very fear- 
Special Abilities: SS appearenes, 


Hooves: Do STR+1D damage 

Teeth: Do STR+2D damage 

Move: 16 

Size: 2.0 meters tall at the shoulder, up to 3.5 meters long 
Orneriness: 5D+1 (1D for Coynite soulrider) 


Breaking a tris takes six months and is a Heroic 
beastridingtask. Thetask can bespread out over two 
years, requiring two Moderate beastridingtasks. The 
trouble is worth it, for the result is a loyal, bonded 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— TP. 
WA 


mount, more friend and companion than pet or 
beast of burden. 


m Tangak 
Type: Carnivorous Predator 


Intimidation 6D 

PERCEPTION 3D 

Hide 6D, sneak 5D 

STRENGTH 5D 

Brawling 7D, lifting 6D, stamina 7D 

Special Abilities: 

Claws: Do STR+3D damage 

Teeth: Do STR+2D damage 

Camouflage: Tangaks can effectively blend in with their 
surroundings. Tangaks gain a «2D bonus to their sneak 
diceif theterrain has buildings, trees and bushes, or large 
piles of rock to hide near. 

Move: 13 

Size: 3.0-3.5 meters tall 

Capsule: Tangaks are huge, shaggy, bipedal preda- 
tors. These crafty carnivores are the worst enemy 
(andthusthe favorite huntingsport) ofthe Coynites. 
While lacking true intelligence, they are cunning 
and dangerous; in fact, some tangaks use elaborate 
traps to capture prey. Despite their huge bulk, 
these beasts can move very quietly and surprise 
their prey. This, coupled with their camouflage 
ability, makes them very dangerous to hunt. 

The favored food of tangaks is tris. Considering 
that tris are fearsome animals in their own right, a 
fight between a tris and a tangak is a terrible thing 
to behold. Though tangaks shun cities as a rule, 
some of the older and more confident tangaks will 
creep into cities at night and stalk Coynite prey 
through the artificial canyons made by the tall 
buildings. 


Adventure Idea 


While at the starport, the characters' ship is 
broken into. A young Coynite, who was respon- 
sible for the characters' ship's security, will be 
branded af'harl due to loss of honor; the young- 
ster is so distraught that he will commit suicide 
rather than be branded af'harl. The only way this 
can be halted is if the property is recovered or 
the perpetrator is caught. 

Naturally, the characters’ sense of morality 
should motivate them to prevent this. The young 
Coynite will accompany the characters. He will 
bea good source of information about Coyn, and 
is the perfect way to teach the characters the 
customs of Coyn. 

The thief, a Coynite of great skill, is hiding in 
Im'Tra'Tal, where he is trying to fence the stolen 
goods. The thief will be in a rough section of the 
city, backed up byhis larcenous friends. Of course, 
if the characters can find evidence proving that 
the Coynite is a thief, he will be branded af'harl, 
many other Coynites will join up to capture and 
execute or enslave him. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are invited to an Ag'Tra's man- 
sion for a party and to spend the weekend. Per- 
haps this is due to their connections — this is 
easy to justify if the characters include a New 
Republic bureaucrat, well-connected gambler or 
arrogant noble. They learn that an Imperial del- 
egation is also here. The delegation's mission is 
to secure weapons and a platoon of Coynite 
mercenaries. 

There is opportunity here to show how rough 
and tumble a Coynite party can be, as well as 
giving the characters a chance to actually falk to 
an Imperial representative rather than just shoot- 
ing her (the shooting part comes later). This is an 
excellent opportunity to show the Imperial 
mindset. From an Imperial’s perspective, the 
Empire is perfectly justifiable, bringing order to 
the galaxy and holding together a society that 
was just a few steps from slipping into anarchy 
and warfare. 

The characters must discredit the delegation. 
Of course, the Imperials will not be pleased at 
this and will take vengeance once the characters 
have left Coyn. 


Coyn 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


55 


m Kidron 
Type: Tropical jungle 
Temperature: Hot 
Atmosphere: Type Il (breath mask suggested) 
Hydrosphere: Moist 
Gravity: Light 
Terrain: Jungle, mountains 
Length of Day: 20 standard hours 
Length of Year: 276 local days 
Sapient Species: Human, Gamorreans, Orfite (N), various 
aliens 
Starport: Standard class 
Population: 20 million 
Planet Function: Homeworld, refuge, trade 
Government: Anarchist council 
Tech Level: Space 
Major Exports: Kril meat, exotic plants, Orfite scent- 
based tech 
Major Imports: High tech 
System: Kidron 
Star: Kidros (orange giant) 


Name Planet Type Moons 
Tue searing rock 0 
Kidron tropical jungle 4 
Kuantar gas giant 22 
Alvor gas giant 13 
Spoi ice ball 0 


W/orld Summary 


Kidron is a hot, jungle-covered planet close to 
its sun, with a thin atmosphere. Kidros' light 
makes the skies of Kidron glow a bright orange, 
and the world is blessed with spectacular sun- 
sets and sunrises. While habitable, Kidron is far 
from comfortable or hospitable. However, thanks 
to the generosity of the native Orfites, Kidron is 
a refuge world for the dregs of the galaxy who 
would like to be forgotten. 

Kidron, at first glance, appears to be little 
morethana settlement of outlaws and cutthroats. 
It is much more. It is a world where those who 
have a history of trouble — whether its source be 
crime bosses, corporations or even the Empire 
— can disappear and begin new lives. No ques- 
tions are asked and no facts are volunteered, but 
as long as people abide by the few laws of this 
new world, they will have no problems. These 
people are called "guests" by the native Orfites, 
who have little understanding of the larger galac- 
tic culture but feel that people who are willing to 
abide by their rules have a right to live in peace. 
Most of the guests live in the High City of Refuge, 
although there are some other very small settle- 
ments on the world. 

The Orfites are a people with a simple culture. 
They have generously shared their world with 
peoplethat most of the galaxy considers beneath 
notice, and that generousity has been returned 


System Datafile 


Kidron system, star: Kidros, orange gi- 
ant. Five planets in system— second planet, 
Kidron, is Orfite homeworld. Kidron is a 
refuge world whose primary industry is 
agriculture. 


From astory related by Captain Rars Lefken, 
tramp freighter captain ... 

*,.. you know, I’ve been to a lot of strange 
worlds. Planets with flying lizards; worlds 
where the locals were half-plant and went 
into hibernation every night; planets where 
the local beasties make rancors look about as 
dangerous as Bilars ... but Kidron is a strange 
world. 

“You see, it’s set up by refugees, for 
refugees. Everyone is here because they’re 
hiding from someone else. People have 
about as much individual freedom as you 
could expect to find on a world. No cus- 
toms, no import tariffs, no regulations. Near 
as I could tell, no laws either. Weapons 
everywhere, spiceliquor addicts, hucksters. 
You want something that's illegal, Kidron's 
the place to go. 

"Still, there is a code of behavior there. 
You try to cause trouble and they pull to- 
gether like sand fleas on a bantha. Slavers are 
dead men since everyone there is running 
from people like that. Goes double for bounty 
hunters. Don't attacksomeone, or everyone'll 
jump in to ‘straighten things out.’ 

“One time! saw a bounty hunter — young 
kid and in way over his head — try to grab a 
local. The locals just pulled their blasters and 
fired. Must have taken fifty blaster bolts be- 
fore he hit the ground. Poof! Instant disinte- 
gration. Wasn't pretty. 

“Watch yourstep, play niceand don ttryto 
remove someone without their permission 
and you'll be fine." 


with warm friendship and profound respect. While 
most of the Orfite sahhs ("tribes") have ignored 
high technology, some have adapted to the larger 
culture of the galaxy. Some enterprising Orfites 
developed the unusual olfactory masks, which 
are popular among Orfites and other species. 
Kidron sustains itself by selling kril meat to 
other worlds in Elrood Sector. The meat is a 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


np—————————— ee 


WA 


staple in diets around the sector. While kril farm- 
ing has spread to most of the other worlds, 
Kidron remains the most plentiful and inexpen- 
sive source of the meat. 


System Summary 


Kidros is an orange giant. Tue is a small, insig- 
nificant rock of molten lava, considered to be of 
no commercial worth. Kuantar and Alvor are a 
pair of gas giants, both a bright violet color. 
Kuantar has a series of rings that is sometimes 
visible in Kidron's night sky. Spoi, the outermost 
planet, is asmallice ball that has been ignored by 
the residents of Kidron. 


Orfites 


The Orfites are a humanoid species with a 
stocky build. Due to Kidron's thin atmosphere, 
they have large lungs. Orfites have wide noses 
with large nostrils and frilled olfactory lobes. 
Their skin has an orangish cast, with fine reddish 
hair on their heads. To non-Orfites, the only 
distinguishing characteristic between the two 
sexes is that females have thick eyebrows. 

Dueto their stocky build and their planet's low 
gravity, most Orfites must wear a power harness 
to give them increased strength when they go to 
standard gravity worlds. 

Orfite society revolves around the sense of 
smell, their most powerful sense. Orfites pro- 
duce powerful pheromones, and each Orfite's 
scent is distinctive in much the same way that 


Kidron's Light Gravity 


Kidron is a light gravity world. Charac- 
ters accustomed to standard gravity should 
apply the following modifiers: 

-]D to all Dexterity-related actions until 
thecharacterhas spent one standard month 
onthe world. After one month, a character's 
reflexes will have adjusted to the lighter 
gravity. 

+1D+2 to lifting, climbing, and jumping. 
This effect lasts for six standard months, 
after which the character's muscles will 
have lost strength to the point where the 
bonus is lost. This bonus may be kept if the 
character actively exerts himself and lifts 
heavy weights on a regular basis. 

*2 to Move for a period of one standard 
year. 


physical appearance is distinctive among Hu- 
mans. 

Orfites have a peaceful and flexible society; 
the Orfites have reached a consensus on indi- 
vidual freedom and responsibility to society. 
Hospitable and pleasure-seeking arethe two best 
descriptions of the Orfites as a whole. They are 
generous, eager to share and they expect others 
to share with them. 

The Orfites have a simple social structure. 
Each Orfite sahh (tribe) has control over a vast 


World Map of Kidron 


Western 
Hemisphere 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 57 


tract of jungle. Plentiful food and water and little 
need for advanced technology ensures that more 
complex organization is unnecessary. Within a 
sahh, each member has immense freedom of 
choice and action. The Orfites have a simple legal 
code: before using the possessions of another or 
using their land, ask their permission. Naturally, 
theft, assault and murder are crimes. Punish- 
ment takes the form of permanently scarring the 
offending Orfite's face and then banishing them 
from the sahh, forcing them to venture to an 
unclaimed area. Other sahhs will not take in a 
scarred Orfite. The Orfites lack the aggressive 
instinct of other species, and warfare has never 
occurred between sahhs. 

Trade between sahhs and individuals is nor- 
mally simple barter. Since there is very little 
technology on the world, a fully regulated 
economy is also unnecessary. 

The mainstay of the Orfite diet is kril meat. All 
individuals are responsible for raising their own 
krils, although individuals and sahhs share with 
thosewho,through misfortune, lackenough food. 
Within a sahh, each person normally has a spe- 
cial role, besides the herding of krils. Some are 
sahh healers, many are weavers and cloth mak- 
ers, some are storytellers, and many are tool 
makers. There are no selected leaders — all tribe 
members vote on all matters, and only with a 
clear majority are new actions or endeavors 
undertaken. If the sahh cannot agree on a new 


ARS 


ee 


course of action, the sahh simply maintains the 
traditional ways with no change of action. Sahhs 
always have a common meeting area; the fre- 
quency of meetings depends on the needs of the 
sahh. Family units of Orfites build their own 
homes somewhere in the territory claimed by 
the sahh; any disputes are settled by vote of the 
entire sahh. 

Orfites are a free and open people. Those who 
strongly disagree with their sahh's decisions are 
free to leave at any time. Often, groups of dis- 
gruntled Orfites will get together and form new 
sahhs, settling on some of the great expanses of 
untended and unclaimed wilderness. 

Since the "guests" (refugees) first came many 
years ago, some Orfites were very curious about 
what was beyond their world. The sahh to first 
greet the guests welcomed these people with 
gifts and sharing of stories. A greedy, corrupt 
senator had falsely accused four people of crimes 
against the Republic, and they chose to flee to 
Kidron, hoping for asylum. 

At the time, a meeting of all sahhs was called 
(this was onlythethird such meeting of all Orfites 
in their recorded history, dating back over five 
millennia). After much debate, all agreed to wel- 
come the guests and allow them to settle on an 
unclaimed area. After all, the Orfites had been 
granted a wonderful world, and they could never 
use it all. It was their duty to share their bounty 
with those who needed it. The first village even- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— TAR Kdo 
ee —————— ÓÁ MrÜÜÜÀ')tÜÓPÁÀ ]Q 


WA 


tually grew into the High City of Refuge. Since 
thattime, peacehas reigned: the Orfites continue 
to welcome new visitors and the city's residents 
have respected the traditions and ways of the 
Orfites. 

Over the centuries, many Orfites have been 
drawn to this new and strange culture. Fasci- 
nated by the technology, some established Orfa 
City, a city that mixes traditional Orfite ways and 
high technology. In that time, the Orfites have 
developed the Orfite scent masks and power 
harnesses, giving Kidron a unique technology. 
To ensure smooth relations between all Orfite 
sahhs, the High City, Orfa City and any other 
groups which might venture to the world (such 
as the Empire), the Orfites established the Coun- 
cil of Gordek (explained below). There have been 
no conflicts between the traditional and the tech- 
nological Orfites — they respect and accept each 
others' differing views, and large expanses of 
unclaimed territory haven't "forced" either Orfa 
City or theHigh City of Refuge to expand into the 
lands of the sahhs. 


m Orfites 
Attribute Dice: 12D 
DEXTERITY 1D/3D 

* KNOWLEDGE 2D/4D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D/4D 
PERCEPTION 2D/5D+1 
STRENGTH 1D/2D+1 
TECHNICAL 1D/3D 
Special Abilities: 
Olfactory Sense: Orfites have a well-developed sense of 
smell. Add +2D to search when tracking someone by scent 
or when otherwise using their sense of smell. They can 
operate in darkness without any penalties. Due to poor 
eyesight, they suffer -2D to search, Perception and related 
combat skills when they cannot use scent. They also 
suffer a -2D penalty when attacking targets over five 
meters away. 
Light Gravity: Orfites are native to Kidron, a light gravity 
world, When on standard gravity worlds, reduce their 
Move by -3. Without a power harness on such worlds, 
reduce their Strength and Dexterity by -1D (minimum of +2; 
they can still roll, hoping to get a “Wild Die" result). 
Move: 11/14 
Size: 1.0-2.0 meters 


Four is the Number 


Four is a sacred number in Orfite society, 
considered to be a bringer of good luck. 
Kidron has four moons, each Orfite has four 
lungs, and the first guests were a group of 
four travelers. People who travel in groups 
of four, or who have a ship that has the 
number four in its name, are considered 


lucky, and are fawned over. They are given 
special benefits by Orfites in the hopes that 
this luck will rub off — they receive price 
discounts, better services, preferred seats 
at restaurants and small gifts. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Council of Gordek 


The Council of Gordek is an official represen- 
tative for the Orfites. The council has four mem- 
bers, chosen by vote from among all the sahhs. 
These Orfites are chosen for their ability to listen 
and interpret the intentions of others, and their 
purity of thought. Councillors are retained until 
a sahh declares that a new vote should be held 
for the council. 

The councillors are charged with listening to 
disputes between sahhs. They cannot mediate 
conflicts, although through their observations 
they can often suggest compromises that both 
sides will find acceptable. They also mediate any 
conflicts between the High City of Refuge, Orfa 
City and any other parties. Their final and most 
important duty is that of diplomatic representa- 
tive. Whenever dignitaries from other worlds 
venture to Kidron, the councillors must greet, 
entertain and negotiate with these people. 


Wy 
Goa 


The Gordek knows of a dangerous secret. They 
have scout reports indicating that the two larg- 
est moons, Primor and Segual, are loaded with 
valuable ores. These reports were filed two cen- 
turies ago. Àny mining company that learned of 
this would probably take the moons for their own 
use, and in all likelihood, the idyllic Orfite lifestyle 
would end. The Gordek has no intention of letting 
anyone know of the ore. The Gordek would, with 
some reluctance, even kill to keep the secret 
from leaking out. 


Relations with the Empire 


Kidron is a world that is insignificant to the 
Empire. The Empire considers the Orfites little 
more than uncivilized savages. The High City of 
Refuge is beneath its notice. Only through the 
grace of the Empire is this world allowed to live 
in peace. 

The Gordek realizes that this is the case, and 
the councillors go out of their way to ensure that 
their world remains unexceptional and easily 
forgettable. 

The Empire has allowed the High City of Ref- 
uge to remain a neutral location out of conve- 
nience. If ever it turned out that there was some- 
thing worth taking or someone worth capturing, 
theillusion of freedom would dissipate underthe 
heels of Imperial occupation troops. 


Orfa City 


Orfa City is the only major Orfite city on the 
planet. Established by those Orfites interested in 
the wondrous technology brought by the first 
guests, thecity has grown to a population of over 
three million beings. The main industry is scent 
mask manufacturing. The masks are quite popu- 
lar with Orfites and have become a popular rec- 
reational device for non-Orfites. 

Orfa City has several other important indus- 
tries, not the least of which includes maintaining 
the kril meat export business. While each sahh 
normally trades with other sahhs for goods, they 
receive regular credits from their off-world cus- 
tomers.Severallarge accounting firms keep track 
of payments and sahh funds — the sahh often 
uses these credits to purchase equipment or 
goods that cannot be made from the natural 
resources of Kidron. However, most sahhs have 
chosen to forgo reliance on technology, so these 
purchases are infrequent. In fact, most of the 
credits earned by sale of kril meat is sitting in 
accounts collecting interest. 

Though off-worlders and guests are allowed to 
visit and even live here, the population is over- 
whelmingly Orfite. The Gordek and the Orfa OI- 
factory Corporation are here. The city has a 
major starport, as well as the kril slaughter 
houses. 


——————————————————— 


ARST 


Orfite Equipment 


m Orfite Scent Masks 
Model: Orfa Olfactory Corporation Scent Mask 
Type: Recreational olfactory scent mask 
Cost: 200 credits (400 credits off Kidron) 
Availability: 2 


Capsule: With scent as their primary sense, Orfite 
entertainment runs in that direction, too. The big- 
gest selling item is the Orfite Scent Mask. 

The apparatus consists of a breath mask con- 
nected by a tube to a small belt unit. The belt unit 
holds about half a liter of water. A small tablet is 
inserted into the unit. The belt unit creates a mist 
that travels up the tube and into the breath mask. 

There are several different scent tablets avail- 
able: “Kidron Flowerbed,” “Kidron Jungle Morning 
After a Rainstorm,” “Goodscent,” “Suppertime,” and 
“Seabreeze” are the most popular. There are also 
intoxicant tablets that can be used. These come in 
many varieties and degrees of potency. 

In recent times, these devices have become a 
trendy recreational device among other species in 
Elrood Sector. Orfa Olfactory Corporation has pro- 
duced many new scent tablets for specific species. 
Scent tablets are five credits apiece, while intoxi- 
cant tablets are ten credits each. At this time, the 
scent masks are completely unregulated, although 
the existence of intoxicant tablets may lead to the 
masks being regulated by the Imperial bureaucracy. 


m Orfite Power Harnesses 
Model: Orfa Toolco Power Harness 
Type: Strength enhancer 
Cost: 800 credits 
Availability: 3 
Game Notes: Negates penalties for Orfites on standard 
gravity worlds. 
Capsule: These harnesses enable the Orfites, who 
are used to the low gravity of Kidron, to act freely 
and without penalty on standard gravity worlds. 
The harnesses are lightweight units with mini servo 
machines built into the joints. Although the har- 
nesses attach to the back, waist, shoulders and 
thighs, the harness is small enough not to be obvi- 
ous under normal clothing. The servos aren't very 
powerful, and provide no enhancement in light 
gravity, nor can they be modified to give bonuses. 


Kidron System Defense (KSD) 


Kidron has long been responsible for its own 
defense. To address that, the High City Council 
formed the Kidron System Defense, or KSD. The 
forces include a Corellian Corvette (the KSD flag- 
ship), four Prosperity-class defense ships bought 
from Elrood shipyards, three system patrol craft, 
one old TIE (bought as salvage and refurbished), 
six refurbished Z-95s and a Skipray Blastboat. 
KSD is always looking for new guests to crew the 
ships. 

The overwhelming percentage of crewmen on 
KSD vessels are guests (only 10 percent of KSD 
forces are Orfite). 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Kidron 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 61 


The High City of Refuge 


This massive metropolis (its name shortened 
to “Refuge” by the population within) is where 
the bulk of the guests live. The city is surrounded 
by a30 meter tall wall and topped by a reinforced 
transparisteel dome that holds in a breathable 
type | atmosphere. 

The gravity is still light, and the temperatureis 
blisteringly hot, but at least the guests can breathe 
easily. A set of four gated airlocks are the only 
means of entrance to Refuge. Each airlock en- 
trance has a mounted ion cannon for defense 
from attacking starships. There is a primitive 
spaceport about two kilometers away, deep in 
Kidron's jungle. 

Refuge itself is a hodgepodge collection of 
buildings of varying size, age, and architecture. It 
is as if each sentient species in the galaxy had a 
hand in designing the city's layout. The streets 
are winding and confusing, and filled with crowds. 
Since there is no centralized planning, residen- 
tial buildings, bars, stores, factories and office 
buildings all share the same blocks; the city is a 
mis-matched collection of buildings, with no defin- 
able neighborhoods or areas. Bars specialize in 
krilliz, a drink made from fermented kril milk. It's 
an acquired taste. 

The city is governed by the City High Council, 
which has fifteen beings selected by general 
election. The council genuinely believes that the 
best type of government is the government that 
allows its citizens to do what they wish. There- 
fore, there are few regulations, no taxes and not 
much else to interfere with behavior — any level 
of weaponry is permissible, there are no laws 


ARS" 


——————————————————————— 


regulating spice, liquors and other substances, 
and there are no prohibitions against gambling 
and other behaviors that are traditionally regu- 
lated. Council members not only make the laws; 
they also enforce the law. Council members are 
allowed to take whatever actions they feel are 
warranted to bring criminals to justice, and often 
entrust citizen militias to assist them in situa- 
tions where additional firepower is necessary. 

The city's economy is driven by the export of 
kril meat. The city also has a thriving internal 
economy because many of the guests brought 
skills with them and opened their own busi- 
nesses. Free enterprise is alive and well in Ref- 
uge, and shops of all sorts are here. Although the 
standard Imperial credit is in use here, barter is 
a common way of doing business. 

Incredibly, crime rates are low here. The few 
laws pertain to the rights of individual citizens — 
robbery, assault and murder are illegal. Since no 
one wants to take responsibility for criminals, 
those who violate the few laws are either ban- 
ished from the world (in the case of assault or 
robbery) or executed (in the case of murder). 
Certainly there are brawls, drunk and disorderly 
conduct cases, arguments over barter value, petty 
theft, and price gouging, but most of these of- 
fenses are overlooked or not even illegal. 

The most visible resident of Refuge is Kep 
Fortuna, the city manager hired by the City High 
Council. Kep is responsible for overseeing fund- 
ing for the laws and programs instituted by the 
Council. He also has veto power over any laws or 
programs passed — this position was given this 
power in the belief that someone removed from 
direct election would be more likely to do what is 
necessary than do what would be popular. How- 
ever, the city manager can be removed from 
office by vote of the City High Council. 


m Kep Fortuna, City Manager 
Type: City Administrator/Mobster 
DEXTERITY 3D 


Blaster 5D, dodge 6D, melee parry 5D«2 

KNOWLEDGE 4D 

Alien species 9D, bureaucracy: Kidron 8D+1, business 8D, 
cultures 8D+1, intimidation 8D, languages 9D+1, law en- 
forcement 8D, planetary systems 8D, streetwise 11D+2, 
survival 8D«2, value 9D, willpower 9D 

MECHANICAL 2D+1 

Beast riding 4D, ground vehicle operation 4D, hover ve- 
hicle operation 5D, repulsorlift operation 3D 
PERCEPTION 4D+2 

Bargain 9D+1, command 9D, con 8D+1, gambling 7D, hide 
7D, persuasion 9D+1, sneak 7D 

STRENGTH 2D+2 

TECHNICAL 1D+1 

Computer programming/repair 3D+1, droid programming 
2D+2, first aid 2D, security 4D 

Special Abilities: 

Tentacles: Twi'leks can use their head tails for communi- 
cation. See page 137 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, 
Second Edition. 

Character Points: 12 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Kidron 


KIDRON DIAGRAM 
High City of Refuge 


L] 


O00 
mE om 
ojona 

iL] 


OL] 
[oo| LJ 

niea ei iH 
rol 


O 
OO 
[jo 


0000 
Ola | 


Environmental 
Control 


O 
[] 


LJ 


[] 
[] 
o 


: 
AC 


OU 
[] 


Entrance — 
with lon Gun 
Emplacement 


elim n 
cto 


-— papo oui 


CL) [EJLIL] 
O d | 
Ont me 


Do 
LIC] 
mr 


E 
OO 


Detail of Airlock Entrance 
30 Meters 


Airlock 
Entrance 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 63 


Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), datapad, comlink 


Capsule: Kep is a Twi'lek. He keeps his head tails 
draped over his shoulders proudly. Kep is hiding 
from Jabba the Hutt. It appears that Kep was visit- 
ing a distant relation, Bib Fortuna, at Jabba's pal- 
ace. Somehow, a few small trinkets from Jabba's 
inventory accidentally found their way into Kep's 
robe pockets. Kep has long since sold the items, 
and eventually ended up on Kidron, where he was 
able to bribe his way into being selected as city 
manager. While Kep has tried to keep order in the 
city and maintain good relations with the Orfites, 
he has also sold his power to a local crime boss, 
Staarn. So far, Kep has managed to keep Staarn 
happy without revealing his affiliation to the public 
at large. 

Kep is a sneaky, ambitious fellow who is always 
looking for ways to turn adversity to advantage. He 
isacoward and would rather talk or con his way out 
of a jam. Interestingly enough, Kep's new responsi- 
bilities have mellowed him somewhat, so that he is 
not only interested in his own welfare, but also the 
welfareof Refuge and the guests. Thus, while he will 
still con, cajole, manipulate, blackmail, and bribe, 
he does it with the best interests of Refuge in mind. 

At the worst, guests warily tolerate him. At best, 
heis well liked, since Kep is a very good administra- 
tor. Kep "advises" people on the best courses of 
action, and his advice most always turns out to be 
remarkably sound. This is because Kep has ma- 
nipulated Refuge events enough so that while people 
are free to do what they want, it is in their best 
interests to do things his way. 


m Staarn 


Type: Bothan Crime Lord 

DEXTERITY 3D 

Blaster 5D, dodge 4D+1 

KNOWLEDGE 2D+2 

Alien species 5D+2, bureaucracy 4D+1, business 4D+2, 
cultures 5D, languages 4D«1, streetwise 6D+2 
MECHANICAL 2D+1 

Astrogation 3D+2, space transports 3D+2 

PERCEPTION 4D+1 

Bargain 7D, con 6D+2, forgery 5D, gambling 6D+1 
STRENGTH 2D+2 

TECHNICAL 3D 

Computer programming/repair 5D+1 

Character Points: 8 

Move: 10 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), elegant robes and Bothan 
business suit, comlink, datapad 


Capsule: Staarn is a Bothan crime boss who has 
spent the past two decades on Kidron. Ousted from 
his society shortly after going through his clan's 
rite of adulthood, Staarn took up a life of crime. To 
him, organized crime wasn't much of a stretch from 
the usual Bothan in-fighting and maneuvering. He 
has built up a small ring of confidence tricksters 
and specializes in illegal, high-interest loans. He 
disdains dealing with slaving and spice smuggling, 
viewing. such activities as crude and unrefined. 
Staarn enjoys being the center of attention: his 
spacious townhouse is known for its wild parties. 
He can often be seen about Refuge, flaunting his 
wealth through his rich clothes and expensive 
speeders. It is common knowledge that Staarn is a 
criminal, but most of the people of Refuge view him 
as harmless: you'd have to be a fool to take out a 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Ng—————————————————————— i 


WA 


loan from him. Most of Staarn's business comes 
from off-world. Staarn, being a practical being, is 
more than willing to arrange creative solutions to 
defaulters. Rather than physical harm, he will often 
ask a "simple favor," such as retrieving vital infor- 
mation on secret business dealings, special com- 
puter codes to military or business complexes, or 
other bits of priceless help. Of course, Staarn has 
been able to use this information to generate a 
personal fortune. 


Creatures 


m Kril 
Type: Domesticated Food Animal 
DEXTERITY 1D 
PERCEPTION ID 
STRENGTH 1D 
Lifting 3D, climbing 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Hooves: Do STR«2 damage 
Horn: Do STR+1D+1 damage 
Move: 7 
Size: 1.5 meters tall at the shoulder, up to 2.5 meters long 
Orneriness: 2D 


Capsule: Krils are the most plentiful form of live- 
stock on Kidron. The creatures are large, climbing 
herd herbivores perfectly suited to the jungle envi- 
ronment and light gravity of the world. Krils have a 
single horn on their foreheads, and large, wide 
saucer eyes. Many Humans find the krils to be 
"adorable," something that puzzles the Orfites. 

Krils are not particularly intelligent, and are 
easy prey for Kidron's predators; they reproduce 
quickly enough that the species survived. The 
Orfites domesticated them thousands of years ago, 
breeding them into larger creatures with more 
meat. Krils are calm animals, can be spooked into 
stampeding with an Easy intimidation roll. 

Krils emit a braying call when angry, and a soft 
humming when they are content. The humming is 
pleasing to Humans, which only serves to make the 
krils more adorable, in their opinion. 


m Jammer 
Type: Wild Predator 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Dodge 4D, flight 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Hide 6D, sneak 8D 
STRENGTH 2D 
Brawling 6D, stamina 7D 
Special Abilities: 
Flight: Jammers can fly using the /ight skill. 
Tentacles: Do STR«1D damage 
Teeth: Do STR+2D damage 
Scent Sacs: Scent clouds effectively blind Orfites and krils, 
both who use smell as a primary sense. When caught in a 
five meter diameter scent cloud, the Orfites and krils 
suffer -2D to all actions using vision or smell. 
Move: 6 (walking), 12 (flying) 
Size: 2.0 to 3.0 meters long, average wingspan 3.0 meters 
Capsule: Jammers are manta-ray like creatures that 
live in the jungles of Kidron. They use a combina- 
tion of air sacs and their "wings" to keep aloft. They 
areferocious predators who can emit a horrendous 
stench cloud five meters in diameter that "jams" 
the olfactory senses of the Orfites and the krils, 
their traditional prey. Non-Orfites who have no 
breathing apparatus must make a Very Difficult 
Strength roll or be nauseous and unable to move for 
1D+1 rounds. 


Adventure Idea 


A criminal (possibly a henchman of Lud Chud 
or Boss Kaggle that the characters met when deal- 
ing with one of those bosses) wishes to hire them 
to take her to Kidron for refuge. She claims to be 
tired of the dangerous life of organized crime. 

While this is true to an extent, she is also hiding 
a datachip that details the crime boss' dealings 
with the Empire. She had hoped to sell the informa- 
tion, but all her attempts have gone awry. 

The crime boss, unhappy with this betrayal, 
hires a bounty hunter to catch the thief, Of course, 
she expects this. The Empire, equally unhappy, 
sends some undercover Imperial Security Bureau 
(ISB) agents to retrieve the chip; she does notknow 
about this. The characters find themselves tailed 
and endangered as they travel throughout Kidron. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


65 


m Merisee 
Type: Agricultural plains 
Temperature: Temperate 
Atmosphere: Type I (breathable) 
Hydrosphere: Moderate 
Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Plains 
Length of Day: 24 standard hours 
Length of Year: 315 local days 
Sapient Species: Meris (N), Teltiors (N) 
Starport: 3 standard class 
Population: 310 million 
Planet Function: Agriculture, homeworld 
Government: Participatory democracy 
Tech Level: Space 


Major Exports: Grain, alcoholic beverages, pharmaceuti- 


cals 

Major Imports: High tech 
System: Meris 

Star: Maris (yellow) 


Name Planet Type Moons 
Meris I searing rock 0 
Meris II steaming jungle 0 
Meris III steaming jungle 1 
Merisee terrestrial 2 
Meris V barren wasteland 2 
Meris VI frigid wasteland 0 


World Summary 


Merisee is a temperate planet, with a mild, 
consistent climate and plenty of fertile land. 
Merisee has two moons, Tola and Meriso. The 
world is homeworld to two closely related races 
of aliens, the Meris and Teltiors, and Merisee has 
become a major agricultural producer for Elrood 
Sector, The world is a paradise in many ways, 
with a prosperous economy, an enlightened gov- 
ernment and a high standard of living with much 
personal freedom. However, there is a darker 


System Datafile 


Meris system, star: Maris, yellow sun. Six planets in sys- 
tem. Merisee, fourth planet in system, is the agricultural 
center of Elrood sector. 

Upon entering Meris system, the characters’ ship will receive 
the following broadcast ... 


“Welcome to Merisee, ‘Breadbasket of Elrood Sector.’ 
We hope your stay here is pleasant. If your arrival has been 
previously scheduled, please turn to frequency J-33-567- 
Y32 for further instructions. If you have a medical emer- 
gency, please tune to frequency J-45-411-K77, and notify 
the duty officer in charge. An emergency team will be 
waiting for you when you land. If you have other business 
to declare or need further instructions, turn to override 
channel 47, where a traffic controller will assist you.” 


66 


side to Merisee — the Loag, a special order of 
assassins, with a long, though obscure history, 
who inhabit this world. 


System Summary 


Matis is ayellow star, the source of life in Meris 
system. The first two planets are searing and 
undeveloped. Meris Il is home to primitive, heat- 
resistant life forms — some corporations have 
investigated the possibility of genetically engi- 
neering these bacteria to produce molecules 
that can be incorporated into heat shielding. At 
this point, experimental results have been prom- 
ising, but the process is expensive. 

Meris III's rich natural environment has led to 
the development of many unique life forms; one 
plant has proven to be a particularly effective 
treatment for Taren plague and related viruses. 
There are several harvesting colonies on the 
planet, with pharmaceutical refinement facto- 
ries on Merisee. 

Meris Visachilly, barren wasteland. There are 
some as yet undiscovered ore deposits. Meris VI 
is a frigid planet swept by constant ice storms. 
Meris VI has a breathable type Il atmosphere in 
warmer seasons; in winter, the air is too cold to 
be safe without a heating mask filter. 


Starports 


Merisee has three primary starports: Merisee 
Prime, Merisee Agra, and Merisee Dispatch. 
Merisee Prime and Merisee Dispatch are both 
located outside the capital city of Caronath. 

Merisee Prime is the largest port on the world, 
and is primarily for passengers, business travel- 
ers and small and moderate cargo vessels. 
Merisee Dispatch is a passenger facility and also 
provides direct access to the medical facilities in 
the city. 

Merisee Agra is a cargo port, where toz grains, 
Utozz, and various pharmaceuticals are shipped 
in bulk. For those major vessels capable of plan- 
etary landing, there are appropriate facilities. 
However since many bulk transports aren't ca- 
pable of planetfall, a large portion of the port's 
traffic includes surface-to-orbit transports. 


History 
To understand the Merisee of today, it is impor- 
tanttounderstand the history ofthe world. Merisee 
isthe homeworld of a humanoid alien species with 
two distinct races, the Meris and the Teltiors. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


PERE oyo —————— !C————— — MÀ Merisee 
| pa 


WA 


World Map of Merisee 


HOPE OCEAN 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


For millennia, both races remained ignorant of 
each other. The world's two major continents 
were separated by a vast ocean that was con- 
stantly disturbed by devastating storms. The 
storms were so fierce that even the coasts of the 
continents were dangerous to live on — it was 
notuncommon for flood waters to reach over 100 
kilometers inland (the majority of Merisee's land 
is plains just barely above sea level). This pre- 
vented long-range exploration, so while the two 
races both developed technology, sea travel was 
virtually unknown. 

This changed thousands of years ago. Inexpli- 
cably, violent volcanic eruptions and seismic 
shifts wrenched the planet. Weather patterns 
shifted and temperatures changed just enough 
to change the air streams. The oceans calmed 
and a land bridge connecting both continents 
emerged. This period is referred to as "the Join- 
ing," and preceded a period of bloody warfare 
that would hang like a shadow over Merisee for a 
thousand years. 

First contact between the Teltiors and the Meris 
was violent. Thetworaces had completely conflict- 
ing philosophies andattitudes, and struggle seemed 
inevitableforneitherside considered compromise 
possible. The first two or three centuries saw 
sporadic warfare and abortive colonization at- 
tempts on the other race's continent. Eventually, 
the conflict escalated into full-scale warfare. Over 
the next seven centuries, billions died, as the rich 
farmlands were devastated by radiation and bio- 


Hemisphere 


logical weapons. However, due to the need to 
survive, the Meris and Teltiors developed very 
advanced medical techniques. 

As the world faced final devastation, and with 
both populations on the brink of extinction, the 
races made a peace. Reluctantly, they put aside 
their differences and began working on restoring 
their world. Fortunately, a planet is a hardy thing 
and the world slowly rebounded from the centu- 
ries of abuse. As new generations were born and 
raised ina tradition of cooperation, hate became 
distrust, and then rivalry, and then, in time, 
friendship. 

While the world was still reeling from the 
effects of a thousand years of war, and the popu- 
lations were still small, there was hope. The Old 
Republic discovered the planet and in quicktime, 
Merisee joined. At first, the Republic lent assis- 
tance by loaning countless decon droids, who 
speduptherepair of Merisee's fragile ecosphere. 
In a few centuries, Merisee had gone from being 
a world dependent upon the Republic to one that 
was providing food, medicine and other valuable 
goods to other member worlds. 

The warlike factions of Meris and Teltiors, 
unable to tolerate the idea of peace, retreated 
into the mountains. Ironically, both groups' ha- 
tred of each other drove them together. These 
two violent factions realized that the days as 
warlords were past. However, there were others 
off-world who would pay handsomely for those 
who savored killing. Both groups united into a 


a 
Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 67 


single group called the Loag, a mixture of the 
Meri and Teltior words for warrior. They per- 
fected their arts of combat and assassination and 
became a secret cult of hired killers. 

As the cult grew, however, the Loag became 
overconfident. They wanted the population of 
Merisee to bend to their will. The Loag began an 
escalating campaign of terror and sabotage; they 
instigated incidents between the two races. The 
general populace learned to fear the name Loag. 
However, the Loag did not count on the interven- 
tion of the Jedi. 

Ahalf dozen Jedi Knights, aware of the pattern 
of hired killings coming from the Merisee area, 
resolved to end the terror. A year later, the Loag 
was scattered and broken, the cult's power 
stripped away. It was presumed that the Loag 
was destroyed, but that was not so. Many Loag 
assassins faked their deaths and sought seclu- 
sion and secrecy. 

A grateful population venerated the Jedi 
Knights, who lost three of their number in the 
campaign. The remaining three left Merisee. 

Quietly, the Loag was rebuilt. This time, the 
assassins selected only those who would be 
bound by the rigid tradition of secrecy. The 
organization flourished again, but this time with 
a greater veil of secrecy. Even today, the average 
Merisee native says that the Loag cult was long 
ago destroyed. It is unknown if the Loag will ever 
seek power on Merisee again. 


Caronath 


Caronath is the capital city of Merisee, with a 
population just over five million. As the only 
major city on the planet, is it home to many of 
Merisee’s corporations. It is the most common 
destination for off-world business travelers, as 
well as the center of Merisee's impressive medi- 
cal facilities. 

The Meris and Teltiors are a hard working 
people and not given to wild celebrations. 
Caronath is a quiet city, with few social clubs or 
taverns. The few ones here do a very brisk busi- 
ness. If there is someone from off-planet on 
Merisee, he will be very easy to find, since there 
are not many places to look. The most popular 
Merisee social spots are the Utoz Houses. 

Caronath does offer a large number of public 
parks, many of which have "thinking gardens." 
For a small fee (averaging five credits per hour), 
a person can rent a small, closed off area of a 
park. They will have this area all to themselves 
for solitude and contemplation. Of course, these 
gardens can be used for less noble purposes — it 
is known that meetings of shameful lovers or 
contracts for Loag assassins have been arranged 
within the seclusion of these gardens. 


Merisee —————————————————————— N PA = 
——————————————————————— 


ARS" 


Therearealso many counselors near the parks 
or who have businesses in the city proper. These 
counselors offer advice and listen to the prob- 
lems of others. This tradition was established as 
part of Merisee's medical tradition, the people 
here believing that healing is a physical and 
mental process. However, this tradition is popu- 
lar with those who simply want privacy and 
advice. 


m Meris 
Attribute Dice: 12D 
DEXTERITY 3D+2/6D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D/4D 
MECHANICAL 1D/4D 
PERCEPTION 1D/4D 
STRENGTH 2D/4D 
TECHNICAL 2D/4D 
Special Skills: 
Knowledge skills: 
Weather Prediction. Time to use: one minute. This skill 
allows Meris to accurately predict weather on Merisee 
and similar worlds. This is a Moderate task on planets 
with climate conditions similar to Merisee. The task's 
difficulty increases the more the planet's climate differs 
from Merisee’s. The prediction is effective for four hours; 
the difficulty increases if the Meri wants to predict over a 
longer period of time. 
Agriculture. Time to use: five minutes. Agriculture enables 
the user to know when and where to best plant crops, how 
to keep the crops alive, how to rid them of pests, and how 
to best harvest and store them. 
Special Abilities: 
Skill Bonus: Meris can choose to focus on one of the 
following skills: agricullure, first aid or medicine. They 
receive a bonus of +2D to the skill, and advancing that skill 
costs half the normal amount of skill points. 
Stealth: Meris gain a +2D when using sneak. 
Move: 10/12 
Size: 1.5-2.2 meters 


Capsule: The Meris are a tall humanoid race with 
dark blue skin. They are very similar to their fellow 
Teltiors; distinguishing characteristics include a 
pronounced eyebrow ridge, a conical ridge on the 
top of the head, webbed hands with an opposable 
thumb and opposable end finger, inward spiralling 
cartilage leading to the ear canal and several thick 
folds of skin around the neck. Meris move with a 
fluid grace, and have amazing coordination. 

While once a true race of warriors, the Meris 
have learned how to peacefully coexist with the 
Teltiors. Many Meris have applied their intelligence 
to farming and healing, but there are many others 
who have gone into varied fields, such as starship 
engineering, business, soldiering and numerous 
other common occupations. 

The Meris are a friendly people, but they will not 
blindly trust those who haven't proven themselves 
worthy of trust. Like most other species, Meris have 
a wide range of personalities and behaviors — some 
are extremely peaceful, while others are quick to 
anger and fight. The Meris area hardworking people, 
many of whom spend time in quiet contemplation or 
playing mental exercise games like holochess. 


m Teltiors 
Attribute Dice: 12D 
DEXTERITY 3D/5D+2 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


—BSTA 
-WA 


KNOWLEDGE 1D+1/4D+2 

MECHANICAL 1D+1/4D+1 

PERCEPTION 1D/4D 

STRENGTH 2D/4D 

TECHNICAL 1D+2/4D 

Special Abilities: 

Skill Bonus: Teltiors may choose to concentrate in one of 
the following skills: agriculture, bargain, con, first aid or 
medicine. They receivea «1D bonus, and can advance that 
single skill at half the normal skill point cost. 

Stealth: Teltiors gain a +1D+2 bonus when using sneak. 
Manual Dexterity: Teltiors receive «1D whenever doing 
something requiring complicated finger work because 
their fingers are so flexible. 

Move: 10/12 

Size: 1.5-2.2 meters 

Capsule: The Teltiors are a tall humanoid race, 
closely related to the Meris. They have pale blue to 
dark blue or black skin. They lack the Meris' pro- 
nounced conical ridges, eyebrow ridge and folds of 
neck skin. They have a much more prominent ves- 
tigial tail and three fingered hands. The three fin- 
gers have highly flexible joints, giving the Teltiors 
much greater manual dexterity than many other 
species. Teltiors traditionally wear their hair in 
long ponytails down the back, although many fe- 
males often shave their heads. 

The Teltiors have shown a greater willingness to 
spread fromtheirhomeworld, and many have found 
great success as traders and merchants. Although 
the Teltiors don't like to publicly speak of this, 
there are also many quite successful Teltior con 
men, including the infamous Ceezva, who managed 
to bluff her way into a high stakes sabacc game with 
only 500 credits to her name. She managed to win 
the entire Unnipar system from Archduke Monlo of 
the Dentamma Nebula. 


The Loag 


The Loag, the group of assassins once thought 
eliminated, have returned to Merisee. Their ac- 
tions, while hidden from the commoners of 
Merisee, have far-reaching effects around the 
planet. The Loag has a secret citadel carved from 
a hollowed out dormant volcano near the land 
bridge. 

It is extremely difficult to make contact with 
the Loag. If their presence was ever publicly 
revealed, Merisee's government or the Empire 
would take actions to eliminate them. The Loag 
cult accepts contracts from many sources — 
crime lords, disgruntled governments, even Im- 
perial officers and dignitaries with someone to 
silence. The Loag cult has many loyal informants 
throughout the galaxy who contact those who 
would hire Loag assassins. There have been some 
cases of informants who attempted to betray the 
Loag — they all ended up dead at the hands of 
Loag assassins, so even informants cannot tell 
when they are being spied upon. Assassination 
fees are high (the lowest known fee was 5,000 
credits), but the Loag is known for being able to 
fulfill its contracts. 


D 


- 
NS 
N 


MMMM The races of Merisee: a Meri (left) and a Teltior (right). 


There is a power struggle going on within the 
Loag. The largest faction wants to make sure that 
the Loag remains anonymous, aware ofthe legacy 
of the past and convinced that it is too early to 
make a move for power. They want to conduct all 
the business they can, mostly off-world, and help 
defend their best interests. 

Thesmaller faction, which currently comprises 
about five percent of the Loag but also boasts 


Merisee 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


69 


some very charismatic leaders, wants to become 
more visible and exert power and influence over 
Merisee affairs. If they believe that the Loag is 
being threatened in any way, they will take mat- 
ters into their own hands. They are convinced 
that the Empire wouldn't crack down on this bid 
for power if the group made it clear that they 
would beloyal to the Empire and the sector Moff, 
who clearly despises Merisee's virtually invisible 
and ineffectual governor, Branff Miro. 


m Typical Loag Assassin 
Type: Assassin 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Blaster 7D, brawling parry 6D, dodge 8D, grenade 7D, 
melee combat 7D, melee parry 6D, missile weapons 7D, 
pick pocket 6D, running 8D, thrown weapons 6D 
KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Alien species 4D, cultures: Elrood Sector 5D, intimidation 
7D, languages 4D, law enforcement: Elrood Sector 5D, 
planetary systems: Elrood Sector 3D+2, streetwise 4D, 
survival 6D, willpower 6D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Beast riding 5D, communications 4D, ground vehicle op- 
eration 5D, hover vehicle operation 5D, repulsorlift opera- 
tion 5D, swoop operation 4D 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Command 6D, con 7D, hide 7D, persuasion 5D, search 6D, 
sneak 8D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 7D, climbing/jumping 6D, stamina 6D, swimming 
6D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Blaster repair 4D, computer programming/repair 4D, demo- 
litions 5D, first aid 5D, security 5D 
Force Points: Varies, typically 0-5 
Dark Side Points: Varies, typically 0-5 
Character Points: Varies, typically 3-15 


Move: 10 

Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), Merisee curved dagger 
(STR+1D, 3D for poison for five rounds), zolall poison vial, 
camouflage clothing («1D to sneak in darkness), comlink, 
molecular climbing spikes (42D to climbing). 

Capsule: A Loag assassin is usually dressed in slate- 
gray camouflage clothing (complete with hood), 
with his items in small packs located conveniently 
all over his body. 

Loag assassins smear their Merisee curved dag- 
gers with zolall venom. One application is good for 
four hits or two hours. The average vial has enough 
for ten applications. 


The Cult of Those Who Redeem 


After the Jedi defeated the Loag, many Meris 
and Teltiors began worshipping them and their 
code. They formed the Cult of Those Who Redeem, 
and they are commonly called the Cult by Merisee 
residents. This organization has taken on quasi- 
mystic status on the planet. 

Prospective members must go through an ex- 
haustive schedule of tests to join, and those within 
the organization must swear to keep their affilia- 
tion secret. 

Members of the Cult swear to try to uphold the 
Jedi Code to the best of their ability. They also 
attempt to unlock the secrets of the Force, but this 
is less important than maintaining the purity of 
spirit and thought necessary to be a Jedi. Many of 
Merisee's most popular and influential personali- 
ties are members of the this cult. They act in a 
variety of ways to preserve peace, protect the 
weak and innocent, and improve the quality of 


& 
$ 
h 
$ 


x 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


md T | 
WA 


life on their world. Some take direct action, acting 
as vigilantes, while others work within the govern- 
ment or business to support enlightened govern- 
ment policies or provide help and assistance to 
those who need it. 

The Cult must remain secret so as not to trigger 
a "cleansing" by the Empire. Since Emperor 
Palpatine realized that the greatest threat to his 
rule was the Jedi Knights, he cannot allow a cult 
worshippingtheirideals and spreadingtheir myths 
to exist. Any Jedi who visits Merisee willattract the 
attention of the Cult, sparking what would surely 
bean interesting encounter. 


Merisee Grand Medical Facility 


Located in the heart of Caronath, the Merisee 
Grand Medical Facility is a series of several build- 
ings dedicated to the healing arts. While prices are 
expensive (about double the normal charge of 
medical treatment), the care is better (reduce any 
difficulties by one level) and quicker (cut healing 
times to two-thirds normal). 

The Grand Medical Facility is staffed with the 
Elrood Sector's finest doctors, nurses, specialists, 
technicians, and medical droids. There is even a 
staff of droid programmers who will reprogram 
and recalibrate medical droids for off-worlders. 


Merisee Asylum 
This is a special facility adjoining the Grand 
Medical Facility. Special containment cells have 
had to be built to accommodate the vast assort- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


ment of beings who pass through here. 

This is alikely place to find victims whose minds 
have been tampered with by someone using the 
dark side of the Force, aside from the common 
causes of mental illness. Some important clues 
about the whereabouts of such people can be 
found by talking to the victims, although it may 
take several hours or even days to gain any useful 
information. 


Utozz Prime Brewery 


This is ahugecorporation with headquarters on 
Merisee. UPB is the biggest brewer of Utozz, the 
brand name for a fermented malt beverage made 
from the toz grain; it is widely popular throughout 
the sector. The second largest Utoz brewer is 
Merisee Smooth. 

UPB employs many people as transport pilots. 
They have had some problems with hijacked ship- 
ments of the popular brew, so there is the possibil- 
ity that they might employ characters are guards. 

Intoxication is a very real possibility with Utoz. 
Every mug requires a stamina roll to prevent the 
imbiber from getting drunk. The first stamina diffi- 
culty is Easy. The difficulty increases by one level 
per mug drank; the difficulty decreases one level 
per hour that passes without another Utoz. 


Collective Farms 


Because of the expense of modern farming, 
Merisee's most common agreement is the collec- 
tive farm. This arrangement allows for the most 


Merisee 


EN Utoz is an acquired taste ... 


efficient use of droid machinery and other equip- 
ment. An average collective farm is a self-con- 
tained community numbering between 24 and 
120 people. The farm has a council (one member 
per eight people) that sees to the day to day 
operation of the community. A group called the 
Agra Alliance (with one alderman from each re- 
gion of the planet) sets prices, controls produc- 
tion, and tries to ensure fair treatment for all 
farmers. The collective farms grow toz grain in 
great amounts, as well as raise several types of 
animals for food. 


Creatures of Merisee 


m Zolall 
Type: Nocturnal Predator 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Dodge 4D 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Hide 4D, search 6D, sneak 5D 
STRENGTH 5D 
Brawling 7D, climbing/jumping 6D- 1, lifting 7D, stamina 
6D«1, swimming 6D 
Special Abilities: 
Tail: Does STR+1D constricting damage each round. Vic- 
tim must make successful opposed Strength roll to break 
free. 
Teeth: Do STR+2D damage, plus 4D for poison for two 
rounds. 
Move: 9 (walking), 15 (flying) 
Size: 1.7 meters long (plus an additional 2-meter tail), 3.5- 
meter wingspan 


Capsule: The zolall is a hairless, slippery, smooth- 


R— 
ARS 


skinned creature with a long tail and floppy triangu- 
lar wings. It keeps itself aloft by air sacs located in 
its abdomen. 

The zolall is a nocturnal hunter that haunts the 
wild areas of Merisee. It is a vicious, daring predator 
that will attack herd animals and people alike. If a 
victim is struck by the zolall's tail, he is wrapped 
tight in its coils. He can do no other action beside 
attempting to break free. 

The Loag assassins prize the zolall for their 
poison sacs, located under the creature's tongue. 
Zolalls can be trained as watch animals, although 
they are never completely trustworthy. Merisee 
medical experts also value zolall venom, for, in a 
modified form, it can be used as an anesthetic. 


Pharmaceuticals 


The planet Meris IIl is an important source of 
exotic plants that are used for pharmaceutical 
purposes. A small harvesting station and landing 
field, manned by two dozen Merisee natives, 
oversees harvesting. 

The chief drug company is Merisee Prime 
Pharmaceutical, headquartered in Caronath. The 
company's biggest concerns are pirates who hi- 
jack the processed shipments, or illegal harvest- 
ers who try to harvest the plants and take them 
to some other planets for processing. 


Adventure Idea 


The characters are hired by Merisee Prime 
Pharmaceutical to guard a valuable shipment of 
antivenin from Merisee to Coyn. Unfortunately, 
some pirates have caught wind of the shipment, 
and will make two tries to get the shipment. 

The first attempt will be right before the char- 
acters leave Merisee Prime Starport. Essentially, 
the first attempt is a land based skirmish. The 
second will be in space, where the pirate ships 
attempt to disable and board the characters' 
ship. 


Adventure Idea 


A Cult member, who happens to work as a 
chemist for Merisee Pharmaceutical, is trying to 
develop a serum that gives the wearer Force-like 
powers. Of course, the serum will not work, but 
this is not known. 

SeveralradicalLoag, Imperial agents, and crimi- 
nal elements will want the formula for their own 
use. 

The Cult member may be misguided, but he is 
no fool. He hires the characters to be his body- 
guards, though he refuses to tell them what he is 
working on. The characters will have to fend off 
attacks from the various elements, while trying 
to ascertain what it is the chemist is working on. 


72 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


; Derilyn 


x. 


m Derilyn 
Type: Occupied urban police-state 
Temperature: Temperate 
Atmosphere: Type | (breathable) 
Hydrosphere: Moderate 
Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Urban, plains, forest, mountains, desert 
Length of Day: 27 standard hours 
Length of Year: 350 local days 
Sapient Species: Coynites, Gamorreans, Hurnans, Meris, 
Teltiors 
Starport: 2 Imperial class, 2 stellar class 
Population: 2 billion 
Planet Function: Trade, manufacturing 
Government: Imperial governor police state 
Tech Level: Space 
Major Exports: High tech 
Major Imports: Raw materials 
System: Derilyn 
Star: Deril (medium yellow) 


Name Planet Type Moons 
Dar searing rock 0 
Alorthas searing rock 0 
Kalis jungle I 
Takornan jungle 2 
Derilyn terrestrial 1 
Fahul barren rock 2 
Sotipe gas giant 14 
Serrata gas giant 5 
Belorphyn ice ball 0 


World Summary 


Derilyn is a planet under the boot of the Em- 
pire, brutally conquered by Imperial forces 10 
years ago. Derilyn boasts a variety of terrains, 
including deserts, mountains, swamps, plains, 
woodlands, and arctic zones. Its orbit and axial 
tilt give it seasons with a hot summer (20° to 30°) 
and a cold winter (-10° to 10°). 

Derilyn serves as the Empire’s base for Elrood 
Sector operations. System space around the 
planet is known as “Imperial Interdicted Space.” 
The world is held under police state conditions: 
all civil rights are suspended, citizens may be 
arrested upon suspicion of treason (without any 
proof), and all penalties for offenses (proven or 
suspected) are the province of the commanding 
regional military officer. Commerce is strictly 
supervised and citizens live in constant fear of 
being hauled away by Imperial forces. 


System Summary 


The Deril system has a medium yellow star. The 
two planets closest to the star are uninhabitable. 
Dar and Alorthas are small, thin-atmosphere, sun- 
scorchéd worlds of no real economic value. Kalis is 
a harsh world with a thick, boiling atmosphere. 
There is no life on the world. Takornan is a jungle 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


world with a type III (breath mask required) atmo- 
sphere. The exotic fauna and the considerable 
mineral deposits makeit a primetarget for Imperial 
exploitation. 

Fahul is an airless, lifeless world. The Empire is 
considering building aslave prison on theworld, as 
there are some valuable ore deposits buried deep 
in the planet’s crust. 

Sotipe and Serrata are gas giants. Serrata is a 
near-star, its mass falling just below the necessary 
level to make the transition. In the sky of Derilyn, 
Serrata is a reddish disk as wide as the length of a 
man’s index finger. 

Belorphyn is an inhospitable ice ball with an 
oblong orbit (due to Serrata’s influence): for a 
portion of its “year,” it actually is closer to Deril 
than Serrata. 


Approaching Derilyn 

Characters wishing to travel to Derilyn are 
strongly advised to obtain a Derilyn Travel Waiver 
before going to the system. This permit may be 
obtained from any Imperial Navy office within the 
sector (there are offices in Elrood's and Coyn's 
major starports). The permit costs 100 credits. To 
get a permit, the ship’s captain must provide a 
complete list of cargo, ship’s weaponry, crew mem- 
bers and passengers, destination port, business to 
be conducted on Derilyn, customers’ names on 
Derilyn, and projected arrival time. Characters 
may try to forge permits as described on page 84 of 
Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition. A 
new permit must be acquired for each trip to 
Derilyn. 

While the permit won’t necessarily grant the 
vessel permission to enter the system, it means the 
local patrol ships are much less likely to confiscate 


System Datafile 


Derilyn system, star: Deril, medium yel- 
low star. Nine planets in system, Derilyn is 
inhabited. This world is under Imperial 
martial law. 


From the Corellian Merchants’ Guild: 


WARNING! Derilyn is a restricted system 
unde? martial law. Imperial blockades zeal- 
ously enforce trade restrictions — violators 
or suspected violators are likely to end up as 
slaves for the Imperial Mining Corporation. 
Proceed at your own risk. 


World Map of Derilyn 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


the vessel and enslave the crew members for 
violating the Imperial blockade of the system. Ad- 
ditionally, upon applying for a permit, most ships 
are searched by Imperial customs inspectors, and 
naturally, most ships are boarded and searched 
upon entering Derilyn system. 

The contingent of Imperial forces in the system 
is charged with preventing all unauthorized ships 
from landing anywhere in the system. If a ship 
refuses to submit for customs inspections, the 
Imperials have standing orders to disable or de- 
stroy the ship. These extreme orders have had the 
desired effect: few ships attempt to enter the sys- 
tem, and those that are caught entering illegally 
normally submit to inspection in short order. The 
characters are most likely to encounter one of the 
Skipray Blastboats, patrol ships, or customs ves- 
sels (normally paired with TIE fighters for addi- 
tional firepower). For complete gamestatistics and 
information, see “Elrood Sector Overview.” 

Ships that are searched while still in space are 
directed to their appointed port; asmall number of 
ships with permits are waved through without 
being searched. If a ship isn’t scheduled for arrival 
in Derilyn, it will be directed to the Derilyn Space 
Defense Platform, an orbiting space station and 
defense platform. 

If a searched vessel bears any contraband or 
people who are specifically wanted by the Empire, 
the ship will be seized and the crew taken to work 
in the mines of Berea. The customs official that the 


“sper 


Western 
Hemisphere 


characters will most likely run into is aman named 
Velgar Borf. 


m Derilyn Space Defense Platform 
Craft: Modified Rendili StarDrive Space Platform 
Type: Orbiting Space Defense Platform 
Scale: Capital 
Length: 4,225 meters 
Crew: 8,750, gunners: 320, skeleton 2,560/«10 
Crew Skill: Capital ship gunnery 5D, capital ship shields 
5D, communication 4D+2, sensors 5D+2, starship gunnery 
5D 
Passengers: 10,400, 4,500 (troops), 1,000 (prisoners) 
Cargo Capacity: 15 million metric tons (including sealed 
dry docks) 
Consumables: 5 years 
Cost: Not available for sale 
Space: Immobile; orbits Derilyn, but may not alter course 
Hull: 7D+2 
Shields: 5D+2 
Sensors: 
Passive: 150/1D 
Scan: 300/2D 
Search: 600/3D 
Focus: 20/5D+2 
Weapons: 
80 Turbolaser Batteries 
Fire Arc: 20 front, 20 left, 20 right, 20 back 
Crew: 3 
Skill: Capital ship gunnery 
Fire Control: 4D 
Space Range: 3-15/35/75 
Atmosphere Range: 6-12/75/150KM 
Damage: 5D 
40 Double Turbolaser Cannon 
Fire Arc: 10 front, 10 left, 10 right, 10 back 
Crew: 2 
Scale: Starfighter 
Skill: Starship gunnery 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


WA 


Derilyn Space Defense Platform 


Secondary Docking 


Armatures Administration 


Towers 


Star Destroyer/Capital Ship 
Docking Cluster 


Maintenance 
Section 


Fighter 
Bays 


Main Weapons 
Platform 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 75 


Derilyn 


Velgar Borf 


I, 
Ad >>> T Type: Corrupt Customs Official 
> Z DEXTERITY 2D 


lip” mec Blaster 4D«2, dodge 5D+1 

í AES KNOWLEDGE 3D 
Bureaucracy: Imperial customs 7D+1, languages 5D, law enforcement: Imperial cus- 
toms 6D+2, planetary systems: Derilyn 5D+2, streetwise 6D+1, value 7D+2, willpower 
3D+2 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Communications 5D, sensors 7D, space transports 6D, starfighter piloting 4D, starship 
shields 5D, swoop operation 4D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Bargain 8D, command: Derilyn customs forces 7D, con 8D+1, forgery 6D, hide 7D, 
investigation 7D+1, persuasion 8D, search 8D+2, sneak 7D+2 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 4D 
Computer programming/repair 8D«1, droid programming 7D, first aid 6D, security 
8D-1, space transports repair 6D, starfighter repair 5D+1 
Character Points: 8 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), comlink, datapad, glow rod, detection equipment («1D 
to search), toolbelt 


Capsule: Velgar is a slightly overweight middle-aged Human with unruly 
black hair. He wears theuniform of an Imperial Naval customs officer, but the 
uniform is often a bit rumpled or stained. It is a wonder that Velgar got as far 
he did. Joining Imperial Naval Officers School as a result of family connec- 
tions, Velgar proceeded to behave in a thoroughly substandard fashion. His 
personal grooming habits and indifferent attitude created the image of a very 
poor officer. Velgar, however, has a knack for finding things and getting 
information, and this talent enabled him to crack the infamous Red Nalroni 
smuggling ring. 

This got him a promotion he ill deserved. Eventually, after several years 
of thoroughly unspectacular duty, the Empire transferred him to Derilyn. 
The slovenly appearance of Lt. Borf is partially an act ... partially. He truly 
doesn't care about his appearance, but he exaggerates it because it keeps 
strangers off guard. Borf is an excellent customs officer, but he is apathetic. 
He is also a good mechanic, which enables him to find hiding places for 
smuggled goods. 

Velgar is bribable, but this must be done out of sight of the troops. Since 
there are other customs officers, Velgar has thus far managed to convinc- 
ingly divert any blame on them. Lt. Borf will not take any foolish chances; he 
does not want to jeopardize a good thing, and he cannot risk others finding 
out about his largess. 


SNNT 


N 


` 


S 


ASW 


N 


Fire Control: 2D+2 

Space Range: 3-10/30/60 

Atmosphere Range: 300-1/3/6KM 

Damage: 5D+2 
Capsule: In high orbit around Derilyn, the Derilyn 
Space Defense Platform is an impressive guardian 
against unauthorized intrusion. Aside fromits weap- 
onry, the space station has two full wings of TIE 
fighters, plus whatever patrol vessels happen to be 
docked there at the time. The platform serves as 
the central communication and transportation sta- 
tion for Imperial military forces on Derilyn, and by 
extension, Elrood Sector. This is an Imperial space 
fortress at its worst, capable of handling sustained 
attacks with ease. 


History 
Before the fall of the Old Republic, Derilyn was 
a planet much like Elrood. It had a mix of agricul- 
ture, manufacturing, and natural resource extrac- 


tion, and was the terminus of the Elrood to Derilyn 
Run, making Derilyn a jewel in the rather modest 
crown of Elrood Sector. 

Then came the Empire. Derilyn's population 
was outraged by Palaptine's power grab. The late 
Senator Wuxod from Derilyn made his planet's 
opinions abundantly clear; he disappeared. Some 
in Imperial City whispered that Palpatine's secu- 
rity forces were behind this. Derilyn's outrage grew 
— and the Empire acted. 

The Derilytes did not realize just how strong the 
Empire was, or to what lengths Palpatine would go 
to enforce order. On the first day of Fifthmonth, 
Derilyn found out firsthand. 

A huge invasion force, consisting of six Imperial 
Star Destroyers, several wings of TIE fighters, and 
a full sector army, smashed down on the vocal, but 
unprepared, planet. 


76 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


WA 


A People in Chains 


By order of General Hul, the following laws 
are in effect until further notice: 


* Curfew extends from sundown to sunrise. 
All citizens must be in their residence or 
acquire an appropriate permit from a local 
Imperial Office of Occupation and Law. Viola- 
tion is punishable by imprisonment or trans- 
fer to the smelting factories. 

* Treason in word or deed is punishable by 


imprisonment or transfer to the smelting 
factories. 


* Food will be rationed as indicated in earlier 
proclamations. Hoarding food is punishable 


by forced labor on Berea. 


* Participatinginillegal orunauthorizedtrade 
is punishable by death. 


* Trespassing on Imperial installations is 
punishable by death. 


* All citizens must have their ID card with 
them at all times. All visitors must have their 
ID card displayed at all times. Failureto do so 
is punishable by forced labor on Berea. 


* Hindering Imperial forces is punishable by 
hard labor, imprisonment or death, depend- 
ing upon the severity of the offense. 


* Vessels which land or take off without 


Thecity of Paran, Derilyn's third largest city and 
birthplace of Senator Wuxod, was annihilated by 
the concentrated gunfire of the orbiting Star De- 
stroyers. TIE bombers deliberately bombed the 
helpless civilian shelters. 

Rather than surrender, the Derilytes fought on, 
hardened by the horror of the attack. Despite the 
outrage, the valor, and the sacrifice, the Empire 
rolled over the Derilytes with the speed and ease of 
a rancor stepping on a drunken Jawa. The planet 
was secured in three days; thestruggle is known as 
the Sixty Hour War by the Derilytes. 

With Derilyn's armed forces disarmed, the Em- 
pire established a permanent presence. For the 
next several months, the rest of the sector experi- 
enced what is now called the Time of Panic. During 
this time, the citizens of the rest of Elrood Sector 
braced themselves for the worst, anticipating that 
the Empire, having secured Derilyn, would enslave 
the rest of the sector. For reasons unknown to all 
but the Empire, this never happened. 

The Empire got what it wanted —a proud world 
subjugated and utterly humiliated. Palpatine knew 
that the other worlds were watching Derilyn closely. 
With this world defeated, the others would submit 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


permission will be captured and impounded. 
Surviving crew members will besent to Berea. 


* Possession of a weapon is punishable by 
transfer to the smelting factories. Members 
of the Imperial armed forces have final discre- 
tion in determining what constitutes a 
weapon. 


* Sheltering subversives is punishable by 
death. 


* Membership in a subversive group and/or 
participating in subversive activities (sabo- 
tage, espionage, assaulting Imperial person- 
nel, contributing to or aiding in the distribu- 
tion of unauthorized publications or broad- 
casts) is punishable by death, and the death 
of all family members. 


Citizens are required to report any subver- 
sive activity to the local security office. Accu- 
rate reports will be rewarded with extra food 
and privileges. Failure to report such activity 
is regarded as willful tolerance of treason and 
is punishable by death. 


Remember! Obedience to the Empire 
means freedom! Subversive activity means 
punishment for all! Report subversives im- 
mediately! Obey the Emperor! Obey the law! 
It is there for YOUR protection! 


to the Empire. To this day, it has remained so: the 
other worlds of Elrood Sector are ever fearful that 
they will share the same fate as Derilyn. 


Derilyn Today 


Martial law is in effect over the entire planet. 
Derilyn’s Martial Governor is General Afren Hul of 
the Imperial Army. The people, sullen, bitter and 
devoid of hope, live a difficult life. All goods are 
rationed, strict curfews are in effect, and working 
conditions are brutal. Only when the Derilytes get 
behind the closed doors of their homes do their 
emotional natures come forward. In some ways, 
Derilyn is just as dead as if the Imperial fleet had 
destroyed the planet. 

Most Derilytes share some common emotional 
characteristics: they are extremely stubborn, forth- 
right, and especially enamored of fighting against 
impossible odds. There is no stigma to surrender- 
ing, but it takes some time for the average Derilyte 
to realize that a given situation requires surrender; 
on the other hand, surrender normally means that 
one will live to fight another time. Derilytes have 
never been known to make friends easily, but when 


they do, they are fiercely loyal. As a result of the 
invasion, many Derilytes have also become suspi- 
cious people. 


The Imperial Presence 


The Imperial occupation force is the equivalent 
of a Sector Army (see page 97 of the /mperial 
Sourcebook). There is a total of 1,180,309 person- 
nel, including 774,576 troops (officially; actual num- 
bers can vary based on distribution of forces around 
the sector, attrition, training, rotation and other 
factors). There are over 66,000 repulsorcraft here, 
as well as nearly 14,000 heavy repulsor tanks. 
There are also three full wings of TIE fighters, split 
among traditional TIE/In combat models, TIE bomb- 
ers and TIE/rc ships (modified to conduct detailed 
observation of communication bandwidths, move- 
ment of civilians and otherwise provide detailed 
intelligence). These fighters are at separate bases 
in Dorrak, Derilysaand Tekar. Whilethe forces may 
seem excessive, bear in mind that part of the 
Empire's strategy is to maintain enough troops to 
frighten the rest of the sector into submission — 
the forces here are more than up to the task. 

There are four major military bases on the 
world, in addition to countless minor bases and 
outposts for observation and occupation of the 
planet. The largest of these is Base Derilysa, lo- 
cated on the outskirts of the capital city. The next 
largest is on the outskirts of Tekar, the city most 
likely to be visited by off-worlders who have busi- 
ness here. The final two major bases are in Dorrak 


and Palpatine. 

There are considerable tensions between the 
Navy pilots and the Imperial Army occupation 
forces (one reason why the TIE fighters were not 
assigned to the standard bases). The commanders 
of the Star Destroyers do not like General Hul, who 
they feel is not giving them enough credit in his 
reports to the Empire. Hul, in turn, does not like 
Lieutenant Borf, the head customs officer, and 
feels that the Navy is not doing its part in keeping 
out smugglers and pirates. 


m Sector Moff Villis Andal 
Type: Imperial Bureaucrat 
DEXTERITY 2D 
Archaic guns: Kiliean bolt gun 5D, dodge 4D+1, running 
3D+2 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Bureaucracy 7D, cultures 6D+1, intimidation 5D, languages 
5D+2, law enforcement 6D, planetary systems 5D+1 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Astrogation 5D, beast riding 5D, space transports 4D+2 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Command 5D+2, persuasion 6D 
STRENGTH 2D+2 
TECHNICAL 3D+1 
Computer programming/repair 4D, droid programming 
4D+1 
Force Points: 4 
Dark Side Points: 5 
Character Points: 9 
Move: 9 
Equipment: Cape, walking stick, pocket computer with 
comm up-link to space yacht, several changes of fine 
clothes, personal medallions and jewelry. 


Capsule: Sector Moff Villis Andalis a young man from 
a well-connected Atrisian noble family. He spent 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


—JSTAÀ! 
WA 


Derilyn 


General Afren Hul 
Type: Tyrannical Military Governor 
DEXTERITY 3D 
Blaster 5D, dodge 6D, grenade 4D, melee combat 5D+2, melee parry 5D 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Alien species 7D, bureaucracy: Imperial 8D, intimidation 8D, law enforcement 8D, 
planetary systems: Derilyn 7D+1, streetwise 6D+2, tactics: ground forces 9D, tactics: 
army operations 11D, willpower 9D 
MECHANICAL 2D 
Communications 4D, ground vehicle operation 4D, hover vehicle operation 5D, 
repulsorlift operation 4D+1, sensors 3D+2, walker operation 5D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Command: Imperial troops 9D+1, investigation 6D, persuasion 6D, search 6D 
STRENGTH 3D 
Brawling 4D+2, stamina 5D+1 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Blaster repair 4D, computer programming/repair 5D, first aid 4D, security 5D+2, walker 
repair 4D 
Force Points: 2 
Dark Side Points: 2 
Character Points: 12 
Move: 10 
Equipment: Blaster pistol (4D), command baton, comlink 


Capsule: General Afren Hul is the Imperial governor of Derilyn. He has taken up 
residence in the Government Palace in Derilysa, the capital city. He has a 
permanent honor guard of 24 stormtroopers and 12 Coynite mercenaries. 
General Hul, a man in his early 50’s, dresses in a very sharp, spit and polish 
military style. He is bald, and has bushy eyebrows that are so thick they appear 
to be one solid, unbroken brow. His eyes are steel gray, with a penetrating gaze. 
Hul is burly, and hasn’t softened during his time behind a desk. 
General Hul worked his way up through the officer ranks, and distinguished 
himself just enough to be promoted but not enough to get a plum assignment. 
He spent his share of time in combat, and is very savvy about firefights, 
ambushes, and guerrilla warfare. i 
A no-nonsense, rigid, unyielding man, General Hul is a firm believer in iron "UN 
discipline. Very much a fanatically loyal servant of the Empire, he believes that 7 
therearenocivilians and no off-limits targets in war.He believes in total victory. A 
Asamilitary governor, he has been ruthlessly efficient in keeping the peace. A 
cruel, sadistic man, Hul enjoys disciplining the people of Derilyn. ("So you don't 
know the location of the resistance cell? Oh, don't worry, I shall not kill you. I mean, if you don't know, well, 
that's hardly your fault, correct? Your husband and children, on the other hand ... oh, what is that? You 
remember? Well, how fortunate! That ensures you and your family will remain together." (After the Rebel has 
given her testimony, Hul turns to the nearest Imperial officer.) "Kill her and her family. I hate breaking up a 
happy home." 
Hul has an intense hatred of aliens and droids, the latter he uses for target practice whenever he sees one. 
As governor, hecan afford that luxury, and has been known to personally execute anyone who would "debate" 
the matter with him. 


most of his youth in the manner of noble families: 
studying the delicate arts of Kiliean bolt gun marks- 
manship and riding his loirbnigg, an eight legged 
reptillian steed native to the reserve world of Frisal. 
His most notable accomplishment was winning a 
pair of local championships in high-gravity sprint 
running. 

As he grew older, he moved on to a prestigious 
military prep academy, his mother intent on seeing 
him become a valued officer or diplomat. While he 
lacked the drive for honors, he finished well enough 
to beaccepted into the Imperial Diplomatic Corps. In 
return for an undisclosed favor to an Imperial sena- 
tor (rumors abound that the favor involved a sub- 
stantial shift of credits, as well as the destruction of 
evidence involving bribe taking), Andal was pro- 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


moted to Assistant to Elrood Sector's Moff. When 
that Moff died duringaroutine space accident, Andal 
was appointed to Elrood Sector Moff. 

Andal is a man secure in his job, and security 
breeds laziness and sloth. Andal has established his 
sector home on Derilyn, taking up residence in the 
newly constructed Moff's Palace. It lies as the north- 
ern end of the Park of Peace, an open park stretching 
three kilometers through Derilysa. General Hul's 
Government Palace is at the other end of the park, 
which is built over the remains of Derilyn's govern- 
ment buildings, leveled in the initial assault on the 
planet. 

Andal spends most of his time travelling around 
the galaxy in his personal space yacht, the Andal's 
Dream, going big game hunting with his well-to-do 


79 


friends from the academy and, oh yes, maintaining 
order in Elrood Sector. He takes minimal interest in 
his job, leaving that task to General Hul, who thor- 
oughly enjoys such duties. He also enjoys playing his 
two Star Destroyer captains off each other — every- 
one so ambitious, and so obsequious; yes, this is 
the life for him. 


Friends of Paran 
(The Resistance) 


The resistance on Derilyn is small and fragile. 
Unfortunately, General Hul has been all too effi- 
cient in his campaign against insurgents. Current 
active resistance members number only about 
420, although there are countless sympathizers 
too fearful to take action. 

The Friends of Paran, named after the de- 
stroyed city of Paran, operate in small cells, very 
similar to Rebel resistance cells. A central head- 
quarters for the resistance operates in the ruins 
of Paran itself. Paran had extensive tunnels for 
the repulsor trains that provided mass transit; 
thesetunnels now serveasthe Resistance's base. 
The Empire knows nothing of the existence of the 
tunnels. 

As a rule, only a few dozen resistance mem- 
bers stay in Paran. They serve as defense and 
counselors to Wuxod, the grandson of the late 
Senator Wuxod and head of the resistance. 


Melodia Fharn 


The resistance member the characters will 
most likely run into is a woman named Melodia 


ES NTC 


Fharn. Sheis one of the most effective resistance 
field personnelandis based in a Tekar cell, where 
she has convenient access to off-world travelers. 


Contacting the Resistance 


Contacting the Friends of Paran is easier than 
one would think. There are not many non-Impe- 
rial ships that come into the system. Any visiting 
vessels are closely watched by resistance mem- 
bers, their crewstailed through the city and their 
business ascertained. The visitors' behavior will 
be watched and evaluated — those who appear 
to beopposed to the Empire are contacted. If the 
cells see a Jedi Knight using her powers, they will 
report backto their cell leader, who will pass the 
news onto central headquarters, which will then 
make contact with the Jedi in a few hours (of 
course, by then, the Jedi is likely to become a 
fugitive from Derilyn's police state government). 
It is a Very Difficult streetwise task to find the 
underground. 

The Friends of Paran are always looking for 
food, medicines, weapons, armor, electronics, or 
anything else that can aid their fight. Also, some 
resistance members have to be smuggled off 
planet because they are wanted by the Empire. 


Average Friend of Paran. All stats are 2D 
except: blaster: blaster pistol 5D, grenade 4D, 
streetwise 6D, hide 5D, search 5D, sneak 6D, brawl- 
ing 4D. Move: 10. Blaster pistol (4D damage), 
grenades (5D damage), armor vests (+1D to physi- 
cal, +2 to energy). 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— TAA 
-WA 


Derilyn 


Melodia Fharn 
Type: Resistance Fighter K 
DEXTERITY 3D x 
Blaster 6D+2, dodge 4D, grenade 5D+2, vehicle blasters 5D+1 
KNOWLEDGE 4D 
Languages 6D, law enforcement 6D+1, planetary systems: Derilyn 5D+2, streetwise 7D, 
survival 8D, willpower 8D+1 
MECHANICAL 3D 
Beast riding 4D+1, ground vehicle operation 4D, hover vehicle operation 4D+1, starship 
gunnery 4D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Bargain 6D, command: Derilyn resistance forces 7D+1, con 5D, forgery 6D+1, hide 8D, 
persuasion 6D, search 7D, sneak 5D+1 
STRENGTH 2D 
TECHNICAL 2D 
Armor repair 4D, blaster repair 4D+1, demolition 6D, first aid 5D+2, ground vehicle 
repair 5D, security 4D+1 
This character is Force-sensitive. 
Force Points: 2 
Dark Side Points: 3 
Character Points: 6 
Move: 9 


Equipment: Blaster rifle (5D), blaster pistol (4D), 4 grenades (5D damage), comlink, 
armor vest (+1D physical, +1 energy), glow rod, datapad, medpac. 


Capsule: Melodia Fharn is an aging woman, with long gray hair that she keeps 
in a bun. Her soft blue eyes reveal a strong sense of compassion. Melodia was 
anurse and counselor in the city of Tekar before the war. Married and with one 
son, Melodia’s life was a good one. Then came the invasion. Melodia's husband, 
who was visitingthe city of Paran, died, leaving Melodiato take care of their son. 
The years passed, her son grew up and married, and had two kids. Two years 
ago, her son and his wife, both ofthemresistance members, were killed. Melodia 
decided to fight back and take care of her grandchildren, now aged 12 and 10. 
She feels itis better to repel the Empire than to allow her grandchildren to suffer 
under tyrannical rule. 
On the outside, Melodia projects the image of a sweet, grandmotherly old 
lady. Indeed, she is rather soft-spoken and is reluctant to speak up or use her 
influence to force unpopular agendas. But when she is on duty, the fires of 
independence burn in her eyes and she is transformed into a cool commando 
who has the advantage of her years of wisdom. She is also a good deal more 
bloodthirsty than most would suspect — “Yes, dears, | had to ventilate that stormtrooper's head before he 
got a bead on you. Now, that nasty man’s gone, so rest a spell and have a nice cup of tea.” 
Melodia's companions nicknamed her *granmera" (a Derilyn term of affection for “grandmother”), because 
she dotes on them and takes care of them all. 


Empire or invited by Moff Andal or General Hul 
are viewed with suspicion. It is not uncommon 
for squads of stormtroopers to follow, question 
and arrest suspicious looking people (anyone 
who is not wealthy is immediately considered 
suspicious). It should be noted that because of 
the harsh recriminations for suspicious activi- 
ties, locals will not talk to visiting spacers and 
aliens unless absolutely necessary. Even then, 
Derilyn residents are as perfunctory as possible 


Derilysa 

This is the capital city of Derilyn, though not 
the largest city. The city is a place of opulence, 
filled with expensive eateries, amusement cen- 
ters, museums, and shops. This city has been 
rebuilt by the Imperials, and the sheer amount of 
credits invested here indicates that the Imperials 
aren't planning on leaving any time soon. The 
facilities are primarily forthe use of the Imperials 
and visiting dignitaries and businessmen (on the 


rare occasion that Moff Andal is present, he 
insists on holding endless parties and celebra- 
tions). When there are no important visitors, 
local residents may take advantage, although 
prices are outrageous, far beyond the means of 
most working people. 

Though theoretically anyonecan visit Derilysa, 
those who are not directly associated with the 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


(to the point of being extremely rude) to not 
arouse suspicion. 


Tekar 
Thelargest city on the planet, Tekaris a sprawl- 
ing megalopolis. The city sports the largest 
starport on the planet, Derilyn Space Central, 
which includes the Imperial Spaceport Sector, 


AR 
ARS 


Derilyn 


DERILYN DIAGRAM 
Base Tekar and Vicinity 


. Derilyn Space Central 
. Imperial Spaceport 
Sector 

Outlying Communities 

. Imperial Checkpoint 

. Imperial Base 

Government District 

. Residential Sector 

. Industrial Sector 

. Business Sector 

. Commercial & 
Harbor Sector 

. Refineries 


CLVMNOUAW N= 


— 


where the area's 36 TIE fighters are stationed. 
Becausethe city was acenter of resistance activi- 
ties after the initial invasion, the city has faced 
harsher treatment throughout the Imperial occu- 
pation. Checkpoints are at the edge of the city, 
where IDs are rigorously checked. Checkpoints 
are also at several key locations throughout the 
city. 

Imperial Occupation Soldiers. All stats are 2D 
except: Dexterity 3D, blaster 4D«2, dodge 5D, 
intimidation 4D+2, Mechanical 1D, command 4D, 
Strength 3D, Technical 1D. Move: 10. Blaster rifle 
(5D), grenade (5D), blast armor (+2D physical, 
+1D energy). 


The Imperial presence in the city is highly 
visible: it isn’t unusual for all midday traffic to be 
brought to a halt by a parade of soldiers and 
repulsortanks. Likewise, violence and sedition 
are even less likely to be tolerated here than in 
other cities. Most of the ordinary citizens are 
forced to slave for Imperial corporations that 
have set up factories on this world: the majority 
of goods are heavy industry equipment and 
droids. Each company has a large imported qual- 


ity control staff to ensure that goods aren't being 
deliberately sabotaged, and the penalty for sabo- 
tage is death or deportation to the mines of 
Berea. The entire city has a constant pall of air 
pollution and dreariness hanging over it — a 
combination of real weather and the despair of a 
beaten people. 


Imperial Mining, Ltd. and 
the Berea Connection 


IML is located in the capital city of Derilysa. 
The company was formed and is run by retired 
Imperial officers and low-level officials who still 
wanted a hand in helping the Empire while lining 
their own pockets. The Empire gladly gave them 
a corporate charter and began coercing systems 
to purchase ore from IML. 

Imperial Mining’s headquarters is alarge, beau- 
tiful skyscraper, the tallest building in the city. 
The company is run by a board of directors. IML 
does not hire freelance adventurers to do tasks 
for them. 

Although the companyis inefficient and smaller 
than Radell Mining, IML makes a hefty profit due 
to their low labor costs. Of course, their labor 


82 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


mt TA 
WA 


consists mostly of interned crews of freighters 
(read: slaves), being detained for an indefinite 
period of time. IML's merchant fleet consists of 
these interned crews' vessels. 

Once every two weeks, a huge container ship 
arrives from Berea, bearingtherich ores that IML 
refines and sells. On the return ship, the vessel is 
stocked with survival supplies for the mining 
colony. It also has a life support capsule for 
carrying new miners and guards. 


The Ruins of Paran 


The city of Paran had a population of 512,000 
people. Less than 3,000 remained after the Impe- 
rial bombardment and siege, and most of them 
died from radiation or the effects of biological 
warheads used in the shelling. 

Today, the city is a ruin, with nothing but the 
skeletal plassteel frames of burnt-out buildings 
and great heaps of charred rubble. The only 
inhabitants are the few outcasts who have some- 
how managed to survive in this hellish place, or 
those who would rather risk the dangers of a 
destroyed city than slave under the Empire. Many 
dangerous predators from Derilyn’s wilderness 
have taken up residence in the ruins of the city. 

Locating the entrance to the underground 
areas where the Friends of Paran are holed up 
takes two hours of searching and is a Very Diffi- 
cult search task. The rubble, most of it lightly 
irradiated, provides an excellent cloak from sen- 


sors. It is more likely that the resistance will spot 
the characters long before they find an entrance 
and confront them. The resistance members are 
quite suspicious, and may requirethe characters 
to prove their intentions or face execution as 
Imperial spies. The resistance has not much to 
lose here, and they have no reason to suspect 
that someone may want to help them; they view 
theirsurvivalasagrand and noblestruggle against 
the galaxy itself. 


Adventure Idea 


Use this idea only if the gamemaster wants to 
keep the characters on Derilyn for a while. The 
Rebellion hires the characters to run weapons to 
the resistance on Derilyn. Melodia's name is 
given as a contact, and she will meet the charac- 
ters at the Tekar starport. 

Once on the planet, the Empire suspends all 
outbound flights, apparently dueto some Friends 
of Paran activity. The characters must now do 
their best to survive and help the resistance 
while not getting caught. 


Adventure Idea 


While on Derilyn, the resistance learns that 
two of their number have been impressed as 
miners. They will be taken off-planet to Berea the 
following day. The characters are asked to mount 
a rescue mission. 


Derilyn 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


83 


Adventure Idea 


The Friends of Paran need a message hand 
delivered to their resistance cells on Berea. The 
characters are asked to go, which means volun- 
teering for work with Imperial Mining. Of course, 
getting back may be a problem, since the mini- 
mum term time is three months. 


Adventure Idea 


A particular Friends of Paran cell, known for 
its extremism, has hatched a plan to bomb the 
Imperial Mining, Ltd. corporate building. The 


ARST 


head of the resistance asks the characters to 
interfere, emphasizing that this attack would kill 
hundreds of innocent Derilyn citizens and have 
almost no effect on the Empire. It would trigger a 
crackdown with no beneficial effect. 

He begs the characters to neutralize the cell 
(and hopefully not kill them) and remove the 
bomb. Even an anonymous tipis not good enough. 
IML, and by logical extension the Empire, cannot 
and must not know that the bomb ever existed. 
The cell has already planted the bomb in the 
lobby of the headquarters. 


84 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


m Kuras Ill 
Type: Unexplored hostile terrestrial 
Temperature: Temperate (verging on cool) 
Atmosphere: Type II (breath mask suggested) 
Hydrosphere: Dry 
Gravity: Standard 
Terrain: Volcanic mountains, canyons, cave networks, 
shallow inland seas 
Length of Day: 18 standard hours 
Length of Year: 400 local days 
Sapient Species: Aganof (N), Pulras (N) 
Starport: None 
Population: 65,000 Aganof, 58,000 Pulras 
Planet Function: Homeworld, exploration 
Government: Tribal 
Tech Level: Stone 
System: Kuras 
Star: Kuras (white dwarf) 


Name Planet Type Moons 
Kuras | temperate rock 0 
Kuras II temperate desert 2 
Kuras III unexplored 

hostile terrestrial 1 
Kuras Asteroid Belt 
Kuras IV frozen rock 0 


World Summary 


Kuras Ill lies in the unexplored Kuras system, 
on the edge of Elrood Sector. The world has 
never been visited by representatives of the 
Empire, and all the available evidence indicates 
that the world has never been visited by off- 
worlders. 

The world is young and quite hostile to Human 
life. The foul smelling atmosphere is thick with 
volcanic ash and dangerous microbes — long 
term, unprotected exposure (for six standard 
months or longer) is likely to result in potentially 
lethal respiratory infections. 

The world's surface is volcanically active, and 
is covered with steep mountains and deep can- 
yons. The world is quite dry, with no oceans. 
There are a small number of lakes in craters, 


System Datafile 


Kuras system, star: Kuras, single white 
dwarf star. 

No other information available at this 
time. Likelihood of habitable planets is low. 


Explore at your own risk. Standard re- 
wards for exploration and navigational co- 
ordinates are being offered, as per Imperial 
Survey Corps docufile XPLR-45.934.R.E.25- 
0003.245. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


depressions and at the bottoms of the deepest 
canyons. Kuras Ills interioris honeycombed with 
caverns, the result of the continuous volcanic 
activity. Because of shifting tectonics, only a few 
sections of the planet's surface are presently 
plagued with active volcanoes — many regions 
of the planet are inactive and stable for the time 
being. 

Kuras Ill's entire ecosphere is hazardous to 
Human life. The world is rich in heavy metals and 
poisons that are difficult to filter out of food- 
stuffs, and most standing water is similarly pol- 
luted. As one might expect, the native life forms 
are adapted to each other, but they are nonethe- 
less quite dangerous to many of the galaxy's 
other life forms. 


System Summary 


Little is known of the Kuras system. The white 
dwarf star was named Kuras millennia ago by the 
Coynites, who could observe it in the constella- 
tion Kezz'Sreik'Kuras, “Predator Beast of the 
Dusk.” 

The system was one of several systems sched- 
uled to be observed by Republic probe droids, 
but the senator sponsoring the follow-up explo- 
ration lacked the political backing to force this 
appropriation through the Senate, and thus the 
system (and many others) remained unvisited. 

As a whole, the system has little to offer the 
galactic economy. Kuras lis a lifeless rock with a 
trace atmosphere. Kuras Il is a barren, desert 
planet with an unbreathable atmosphere and 
two small moons. Kuras III is the world of prime 
interest, yet would require intensive terraforming 
to be made habitable. The Kuras Asteroid Belt is 
a thick band of rock, metals and ice that hampers 
navigation into the inner portions of the system; 
it does have rich potential for mining. Kuras IV is 
a captured planet, covered with barren rock and 
a light frosting of frozen water and methane 
crystals. 


Kuras Asteroid Belt 


The Kuras Asteroid Belt, lying between Kuras 
Ill and Kuras IV, was responsible for the destruc- 
tion of the Old Republic probe that first investi- 
gated the system. To this day, it is a major 
navigational hazard within the system. 

In order for a ship to get past the belt, the pilot 
must make three Difficult piloting rolls (the spe- 
cific skill depends upon the type of ship being 


AR 
ARS" 


World Map of Kuras Ill 


Eastern 
Hemisphere 


flown). This represents the eight hours of real 
time it will take to cross the belt. This area of 
space is so cluttered with debris that it is virtu- 
ally impossible to plot a hyperspace course that 
will bring the ship out near Kuras (suggested 
difficulty of Heroic +10); ships will usually have 
to fly through the belt. 

If a pilot brings his ship to a standstill while 
within the belt, the pilot must make a Moderate 
piloting roll to avoid being hit by an asteroid for 
every four hours in the belt. 

Failure of a piloting roll means that an asteroid 
has hit the ship. To determine the damage (in 
starfighter scale), find the number of points by 
which the pilot missed the roll on the chart 
below. 


Roll 
Missed By: Asteroid Size Damage 

1-2 Tiny 1D 
3-5 Small 2D 
6-8 Medium 3D 
9-1] Medium 4D 

12-14 Large 7D 
15+ Very Large 3D 


(capital scale) 


Ironically, the asteroid belt is also the system's 
richest feature, since many of the asteroids are 
rich in ores. For characters to successfully find 
valuable asteroids, they need ten minutes to 
complete a scan and a Moderate sensors total. 


Western 
Hemisphere 


A Hostile World 


Kuras III, by Human standards, is a dreary, 
overcast world. The dim light of its star and 
continual plumes of volcanic dust make the world 
perpetually overcast and hazy. The temperature 
is generally cool, ranging from zero to fifteen 
degrees standard. However, the ever-present 
addition of hot volcanic ash to the atmosphere, 
mixed with the cool lower layers of the atmo- 
sphere, creates dangerous and stiflingly hot wind 
storms, which often sweep the world's surface. 
Aside from the dramatic temperature changes, 
the storms often hurl huge rocks through the air 
and uproot what little vegetation there is. Be- 
cause of these, most forms of life on Kuras make 
their homes in the caverns and sheltered valleys 
of the world. 

The largest bodies of water on the planet are 
the small inland and extremely deep seas with a 
high concentration of minerals and salts. Be- 
cause of the much cooler temperatures associ- 
ated with the seas, they are often the site of 
extremely violent heat storms. Theseas arehome 
to a variety of marine life, much of it predatory 
and dangerous. Because of Kuras III's hostile 
nature, most life forms are resistant to poisons 
and toxins, and many have tough armor to resist 
claws and bites. Like the land life forms, marine 
life is poisonous to Humans and similar life forms. 

There are also many pools and ponds at the 
bottom of the canyons. They are less likely to 
contain the largest, most dangerous marine life 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


— I AR KUAS ||! 
eee 


-WA 


forms, but there are still many formidable crea- 
tures to be foùnd in the murky depths. 


Dangers of an 
Unknown World 


An Easy sensors roll will reveal that the atmo- 
sphere is type II and the characters should wear 
breath masks. If they choose not to, the first thing 
they will notice upon entering the atmosphere is 
a putrid, organic odor that is almost overpower- 
ing. The atmosphere irritates the inside of the 
mouth and nose, and leaves a bad aftertaste, like 
rotting vegetables. For every half hour of unpro- 
tected exposure, characters are required to re- 
sist the detrimental effects of the atmosphere, 
which is an Easy stamina task. Failing the task 
reduces the character’s Strength and stamina by 
-1D. Ifa character loses 2D or more, all other skills 
drop by 2D and the character’s Move is halved 
because the character is so weakened that he 
cannot concentrate. If the character’s Strength 
drops to 0D, the character falls unconscious for 
1D days. The Strength and stamina return after 
two hours of rest with plenty of safe (for example, 
purified or non-Kuras) fluids. 

Kuras' water is also thick with contaminants 
and harmful bacteria. Any character who drinks 
this water (even a handful) must make a Moderate 
stamina check to avoid illness. If the character fails 
the roll by one to five points, the character is 
paralyzed with stomach cramps. If the character 
fails the roll by six or more points, the character 
passes out for 1D hours and will become feverish. 
If the character fails a second stamina check, the 
contaminants kill the character. 

Simply boiling the water will not make it safe. 
Any water must pass through a complete filtra- 
tion system (such as those found in survival kits 
and ship purification systems) to be safe to drink. 

Kuras IIl’s plants are just as dangerous: a meal 
of berries or vegetables will have the same detri- 
mental effects as drinking the water. Eating one 
meal requires a Difficult stamina check. Unlike 
the water, the flora and fauna cannot be detoxi- 
fied for Human consumption, due to the pres- 
ence of numerous native toxins that are an im- 
portant part of the planet's ecosphere. 

Standard starship sensors can detect the bad 
air and water, but unless the characters have 
sensors to scan the food, they will be unaware 
that it is harmful. Characters who make Easy 
survival rolls are able to guess that the water, 
plants and animals are dangerous to consume. 
Gamemasters can give a few hints (“the plant 
tastes bitter") but should not go out of their way 
to warn players of the dangers of Kuras III (un- 
less, of course, one of the characters is a scout 
and should know better or has an extremely high 
survival skill). 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


An Unknown W/orld... 


To: TheSenate Committee on New World Discovery and 
Exploration 

From: Bryn Shal, Head Scientist, Project: Wayfarer, 
Republic Scout Service 

Dear Senators: 

Remote probe ZeX555-TR349 was destroyed in route 
from Elrood Sector to Cegul Sector, while surveying previ- 
ously unexplored systems. 

It is proposed that a secondary automated probe, or 
better yet, a manned mission, be sent to Elrood and Cegul 
to complete the survey. With the number of sapient spe- 
cies native to the region, this area of space seems to bea 
rich spawning ground for new life forms. Further investiga- 
tion seems warranted. 

End Transmission 


To: Bryn Shal, Head Scientist, Project: Wayfarer, Repub- 
lic Scout Service 

From: The Senate Committee on New World Discovery 
and Exploration 

Sir: 

Your findings are noted and have been taken into con- 
sideration by the committee. 

However, as you are no doubt aware, funds for explora- 
tion and survey are increasingly difficult to come by. In 
light of this constraint, there are many more promising 
areas than this one in a backwater corner of the galaxy. At 
this time, further exploration of Elrood and Cegul Sectors 
is unwarranted. 

Approval of replacement of destroyed probe will await 
final recommendation by Republic Scout Service, Depart- 
ment of Remote Exploration. 

End Transmission 


Historical Footnote: The first report was but one of 
thousands of similar reports that were filed and forgotten. 
Tothis day, no further exploration of the Kuras system was 
sponsored. 


Landing on Kuras Ill 


There are no starports on Kuras III, but there 


are a few flat plains areas that can substitute as 
a landing field. There is one particularly large 
strip that is ideal. Its immense size and the con- 
trast to the otherwise rugged terrain of Kuras IIl 
makes the landing site visible from orbit. Landing 
on the strip should be a Very Easy task, unless 
the ship is caught in one of the heat storms, 
which would increase the difficulty to Moderate 
(or perhaps Heroic if the storm was fierce 
enough). 

Upon disembarking from their ship, the char- 
acters should be overwhelmed by the desolate 
world around them. Peaks rise several kilome- 
ters into the air, and the ground around them is 


rough, torn by volcanic activity and blasted by 
the immense wind storms. This is a world that 
should show nature in its most volatile form. 


The Value of Kuras Ill 


Ifa party of characters manages to doasurvey 
of the planet, which would take several days, 
they will find a modest amount of mineral depos- 
its: kiiral (a component of kiirium) and metarr 
(one of the base components of carbon-metar) 
are found here in great quantities. While the 
world isn't rich, there is certainly enough here 
that asmall mining company might be interested 
in the world. 

Otherwise, the world's commercial value is 
limited. It would require massive terraforming to 
be made habitable, thereis no agricultural poten- 
tial and the world has minimal resources. 

However, in time, the characters will learn 
that Kuras III offers more than danger. They are 
not alone ... 


Alien Species 

Kuras Illis home to two unique alien species: the 
Aganof and the Pulras. When the characters meet 
the following two species, certain things must be 
kept in mind by the gamemaster. These races are 
alien. They have never encountered the galaxy at 
large and they are very unusual life forms. 

Gamemasters should look at the characters 
through their “eyes.” What will it matter if the 


characters point their weapons and threaten the 
creatures? Since the creatures have never seena 
blaster, how do they know that these newcomers 
(the characters) aren't simply offering them some 
new type of food? Since the Aganof depend on 
touch and have no sense of sight, consider how 
they will approach the situation — they may 
come forward with delicate caution, but want to 
touch the characters to determine their shape 
and size. On the other hand, characters who 
extend a hand of friendship could also be misin- 
terpreted. The natives could be thinking, “Why is 
that odd creature extending a pseudopod at me? 
Does it mean to attack me?” 

Both ofthesapient species are relatively peace- 
ful. It is up to the characters to convince them of 
that they are also peaceful. 


Aganof 


The Aganof are a large, androgynous animal 
species. They have approximately one dozen 
small appendages for movement (the exact num- 
ber various with the individual), with several 
touch sensitive pairs of appendages running along 
their bodies. Their backs have heat dissipating 
flaps and olfactory sensors on large flexible stalks. 
The flaps are also coated with a digestive acid 
that is used to break down foods; small mouths 
are nestled underneath the flaps. Each end of the 
body contains a long, jointed limb that ends in a 
shelled claw. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


l a aaan eee 


-WA 


This species lives, works, and breeds in the 
damp, cool caves of Kuras III. The Aganof must live 
in these caves, since only these locations provide 
enough moisture for them to survive (they absorb 
moisture through all of their appendages). They 
feed on vegetation, insects and a large variety of 
small herbivores. Aganof reproduce in their cool, 
dark caves of their world — they have both male 
and female characteristics and lay fertilized eggs. 

The Aganof have only the senses of taste, 
smell and touch (which is their primary sense). 
The Aganof method of communication is by a 
combination of creating vibrations with the 
shelled claw. The vibrations are modified with a 
special organ within the claw called the “sender.” 
The sender codes the vibrations into a sort of 
language that other Aganof can understand. 

Nearby Aganof can detect the vibrations and 
decipher their meaning (actual distance depends 
on many factors, including soil composition and 
competing vibrations). Like speech, this commu- 
nication can be perceived by all who are within 
reception distance. 

Aganof language is icon-based: recipients get 
pictures in their minds instead of words. Thus, if 
an Aganof wanted to ask if a character was an 
“alien” who came from outer space, the charac- 
ter would get a picture of himself, falling to the 
ground (Aganof cannot conceive of the sky), plus 
the feeling that the pictures were interrogative. 

The Aganof are an intelligent species, with a 
society and a culture. All the Aganof born in the 
same cave are essentially a tribal unit. The eldest 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


Aganof is the adviser of the cave-fellows, and 
thus his opinion is given more weight than any 
others in the cave-unit. The Aganof tribes peace- 
fully co-exist with each other, with inter-tribal 
meetings quite common (their purpose being to 
share stories, trade knowledge and exchange 
tribe members for mating purposes). The Aganof 
have stories, songs, and even a form of art involv- 
ing the arranging of the dead and decomposing 
bodies of their departed fellows. 

A favorite Aganof pastime is having philo- 
sophical debates and intellectual arguments. 
Among the issues debated are what lies above 
“the ground” (since their limited senses cannot 
detect very much about their world around them; 
theconcept of spaceis completely alien to them). 

Aganof are tranquil, calm and friendly sorts. 
Their society is a peaceful one, and there is not 
even a word in their vocabulary for “war.” They 
understand defense against predators, but not 
organized aggression and murder of other intel- 
ligent creatures, Conflict among members of their 
own species is almost unknown. 

The Aganof would have a very difficult time 
grasping the concept of the Rebellion against the 
Empire. Both the concepts of outer space and 
warfare would have to be explained to them. 
Even if the Empire came to their world and en- 
slaved them, they would have a difficult time 
distinguishing between the Empire and those 
who would fight it, possibly meaning that the 
Aganof would learn to fear and even attack all 
Humans and aliens from beyond their world ... 


m Aganof 
Attribute Dice: 11D 
DEXTERITY 1D/2D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D/4D 
MECHANICAL 1D/2D 
PERCEPTION 1D/4D+2 
STRENGTH 1D/3D 
TECHNICAL 1D/3D 
Special Skills: 
Perception skills: 
Vibration Detection: Aganof use this skill to detect ground 
vibrations and determine the proximity of creatures and 
beings around them. The difficulty depends on the dis- 
tance and type of vibration: 


Light vibration (such as 
made by a small creature) 


Moderate vibration (such as made 
by a creature 20-100 kilograms) Easy 


Heavy vibration (such as made by a 


Difficult 


much larger creature) Very Easy 
Modified by soil: 
Loose soil that easily 

carries vibration -5 or more 


Packed soil or material that 
absorbs vibration 0 


Soils or materials that absorb 


virtually all vibration +5 or more 
Distance: 
0-2 meters 0 
3-10 meters +5 to difficulty 
11-30 meters +10 to difficulty 
31+ meters +15 or more to difficulty 


They can also detect air variations, such as temperature 
change, movement, and so forth, and thus can sometimes 
detect approaching flying creatures, or even sense incom- 
ing projectiles and dodge them. 

Aganof can also use their hard shells and this skill for 
“speech” through ground vibrations, as naturally as Hu- 
mans use their mouths and sense of hearing for speech. 
Special Abilities: 

Blindness: Aganof cannot “see” in the way that Humans 
can; they cannot hear in the traditional sense, but they 
can detect intense air vibrations. Their prime external 
sense is touch and a sensitivity to ground vibrations. By 
judging the intensity and frequency of vibrations, in com- 
bination with the type of surface they are standing on, 
they can detect creatures near them. 

Claw: Causes STR+1D+2 damage. 

Move: 4/6 

Size: 1.3-2.5 meters tall, 1.5-3.5 meters long 


The Spawning Caverns 


This is a series of caverns with rotting subter- 
ranean fungi lining a dirt-covered floor. This is 
the sacred spot where the Aganof reproduce. 
Characters attempting to negotiate the treacher- 
ous passageways down are faced with two Diffi- 
cult climbing tasks. Failure on either one results 
in the character falling for 3D damage. 

These caverns are the only place where the 
Aganof will make an honest attempt at defending 
their property. Clumsy Aganof will attempt to 
ram invaders with their bulk. 


Kuras Ill D WA Ran 
ee 


ARST 


The Pulra 


The second sentient species of Kuras III is the 
Pulra, an amorphous life form that roams the 
surface of the planet. Pulras are brownish, green or 
black, gelatinous and shape-changing creatures. 

They have no sensory organs. They have a 
highly flexible body structure, allowing them to 
assume a countless variety of forms. This is the 
evolution of a sophisticated attack and defense 
form: they can use this ability to change color and 
shape to hide from predators or lay traps for their 
prey. They are omnivores, eating plants and small 
animals. | 

Pulras, while most commonly about 50 cubic 
centimeters, can reach sizes upwards of 150 liters. 
These creatures can also manipulate their genetic 
code so that several Pulras can form one entity, 
called a “bind.” 

Pulras’ prime sense is a form of sonar: they 
broadcast ultrasonic signals, and then determine 
their surroundings around them based ontheecho 
of the signals. 

Pulras live in large colonies, normally having 
from two dozen to over one hundred members. 
Because of their social nature, all Pulras are able to 
grasp the concept of teamwork and cooperation. 
They react more favorably to other groups of 
beings, as this serves as a common frame of refer- 
ence. 

For reproduction, an individual Pulra simply 
starts retaining food energy to nourish a new Pulra 
growing within its body; it appears to be a form of 
fission. Pulras don't fully understand what triggers 
the growth of a new Pulra, but they suspect that it 
is due to natural biochemical fluctuations. 

Pulras, while not perfectly harmonious, gener- 
ally get along with each other peacefully. All dis- 
putes are normally settled by the colony as a 
whole. There are few inter-tribal conflicts, but 
when they do occur, they are quite brutal. The 
Pulras are curious about the Aganof; they know 
they are intelligent, but have had no luck establish- 
ing effective communications with them. 

Their biochameleon process can work on other 
sentients: a Pulra can create the form of any ap- 
pendage, and within certain bounds, they can rep- 
licate the functions of certain mechanisms. For 
example, a Pulra could replicate an arm and attach 
itself to a Human to serve as a bionetic replace- 
ment. However, they couldn't replace someone's 
eye because the structure, function and interac- 
tion with the body is simply too complex. 

Duetotheclarity oftheirthoughts, Pulras would 
have little difficulty in grasping concepts such as 
space travel. They can easily piece together the 
theory that if they are on a planet orbiting a star, 
then other stars must also have planets, and those 
planets must have life on them, and some of those 
life forms may have created means to leave their 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


-— T 
WA 


world. Pulras have no interest in space travel or 
technology. The Pulras call their world "Host." 


m Pulra 
Attribute Dice: 6D 
DEXTERITY 1D/3D 
KNOWLEDGE 1D/3D 
MECHANICAL 1D/2D 
PERCEPTION 1D/3D 
STRENGTH 1D/2D 
TECHNICAL 1D/3D 
Special Abilities: 
Added Strength: Pulra can grow to enormous sizes and can 
gain many more Strength dice as a result. 
Amorphous: Pulras can change their shape. This process 
takes a few minutes. They can form appendages for com- 
bat (doing STR+1D damage), or other forms for a variety of 
tasks (such as turning into a wheel to roll down a hill). 
Bind: Several Pulras can join shape to create a larger 
creature. Use the "Combined Action Bonus Table" on page 
69 of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, Second Edition to 
determine the bonus for Pulras joining. 
Echo Location: Pulras sense the outside world by sonar 
echo location at ultrasonic frequencies. 
Move: 2/5 
Size: 20 cubic centimeters to 150 liters 


Flora and Fauna of Kuras lll 


Bear in mind that the names given to these 
creatures and plants are names that could be given 
by the characters. Since the two alien species lack 
language in the traditional sense, the characters 
are likely to be the ones to name these items. 


Metalwood 


Metalwoods are huge trees that grow to a height 
of 30-40 meters. Their leaves area metallic gray and 
theirtrunks are smooth, dark gray, like sheet metal. 
These odd trees grow only where there are ore 
deposits underground. Thetrees' roots actually go 
deep into the planet's crust, and tap the ores for 
sustenance. Withtheenergy fromthe white dwarf's 
rays, the trees refine the ore and makeit into layers 
which are used as bark. 


Waterfungi 


These mushroom-like fungi grow in pools of 
shallow water. They live by absorbing nutrients 
found in the ground water: clean water is then 
released by the fungi as a waste product. 

A Moderate survival task will show that the 
water flowing past the waterfungi is clearer and 
cleaner. It only stays clean for afew minutes before 
thoroughly mixing with the rest of the dangerous 
(to characters) water. 


Infectious Moss 
This sickly fuzzy moss is a disgusting swirl of 
green, gray, and tan. This moss clings to living 
tissue and multiplies quickly. Characters whotouch 
the moss with exposed flesh must make a Moder- 
ate stamina roll or be infected with the moss. Once 
on the characters’ skin, the moss will begin to feed 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


off the characters’ natural body minerals. Each 
day, the character must make a Difficult stamina 
roll or lose 1D of Strength. Once the character is 
down to OD, he dies from the infection. Curing the 
infestation is a Difficult medicine task, or a Heroic 
first aid task. Only one attempt of each skill can be 
done per day per infected victim. The Aganof 
actually savor the moss as a delicacy and will eat it 
off a character if given permission. 


m Hairy Savages 
Type: Violent Anthropoid Species 
DEXTERITY 5D 
Brawling parry 6D, dodge 6D+1, melee combat 7D, melee 
parry 6D+2, running 5D, thrown weapons: rocks 6D+1 
PERCEPTION 2D 
Hide 4D, search: track 5D+1, sneak 6D 
STRENGTH 5D 
Brawling 7D, climbing/jumping 7D, lifting 6D+2, stamina 
6D+2, swimming 6D+1 
Move: 10 (walking), 12 (travelling through trees) 
Size: 1.7-2.2 meters tall 


Kuras Ill 


SS 


" SS S.N 


a 


ANM " 
"SS 


S 
N 


NS 
N SS 
SONS 


PLANA AAAS 


Equipment: Throwing rocks (STR«1D), stone knives 
(STR+1D), sharpened sticks (STR+2D) 


Capsule: These large anthropoids are savage preda- 
tors and possess rudimentary intelligence. They 
can formulate simple tactics and use primitive tools. 
The savages are foul-tempered brutes, who, though 
they hunt to survive, still seem to take an unusual 
amount of pleasure in inflicting pain on their quarry. 
The creatures live in the trees, plants and caves of 
Kuras Ill, and feed on both the Pulra and Aganof. 
They willattackany characters who visit the world. 


m Wild 
Type: Dangerous Grazing Animal 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Dodge 6D-2, running 8D+1 
PERCEPTION 3D 
Hide 6D+2, sneak 6D«1 
STRENGTH 2D 
Brawling 4D, stamina 4D 
Special Abilities: 
Fangs: Do STR+1D damage. 
Newborn: Newborn wilds get +2D to Strength, brawling and 
stamina. 
Move: 13 
Size: 1.5 meters tall at the shoulder, up to 2.5 meters long 


Capsule: Wilds are another creature named by the 
Aganof and the Pulras. Adult wilds are calm herbi- 
vores that graze on the plants and fungi of Kuras III. 
The creatures get their name “wilds” due to the 
birth process. The wilds have three genders. The 
male and female each deposit their genetic codes to 
the third sex, called the carrier. The young gestate 
in the carrier's womb. At the time of birth, the litter 
of eight to twelve young goes into a frenzy and the 
newborns burst their way out. The newborns then 


2 
La 


consume the carrier, allowing them to survive for 
an extended period without having to graze and 
travel. For the first few months of life, the sexless 
newborns are in a feeding frenzy — they will attack 
any creature, They consume immense quantities of 
food, and rapidly grow to adulthood. Upon reach- 
ing adulthood, the wilds take on their sex charac- 
teristics and become calm, grazing herbivores. 


m Quicker 
Type: Flying Omnivore 
DEXTERITY 4D 
Dodge 6D, flight 6D 
PERCEPTION 4D 
Search 7D 
STRENGTH 4D 
Brawling 6D+1, lifting 7D, stamina 6D 
Special Abilities: 
Beak: Does STR+1D damage 
Talons: Do STR+2D damage 
Move: 14 (flying) 
Size: 2.0 meters long, 4.5-meter wingspan 
Capsule: The quicker is a flying species so named 
by the Pulras (it moves quicker than any other life 
form they have sensed). The quicker is an omnivore 
who inhabits the high mountains of Kuras Ill, but 
tends to come down to the lowlands to find food. 
Most quickers are nocturnal and their eyes glimmer 
a sinister green as they fly at night. 


Adventure Idea 


This is the typical marooned setting. Coming 
through the asteroid belt, the characters’ ship is 
damaged, requiring an emergency landing. 

After landing, they must explore their immedi- 


92 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


ee  eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeEeEeEeEeEE——eeeeeeeeee 


-WA 


ate surroundings, repair the ship, and get sup- 
plies in order to stay alive. 


Adventure Idea 


An Imperial Scout vessel is tracked leaving the 
secret base on Tifnyl and heading in the direction 
ofthe Kuras İllsystem. The Empireis sendingaship 
to the unexplored planet. The Rebellion sends the 
characters after the ship, and instructs them to tail 
the ship but not to reveal their presence until after 
the scout ship reaches its destination. 

The Imperial ship will land on Kuras Ill and begin 
preliminary sensor sweeps. The Pulras and Aganof 
will be spotted. There is a possible three way 
confrontation in store here between the charac- 
ters, the Empire, and the natives of Kuras III. 


Adventure Idea 


Radell Mining Corp. hires the characters to 
look for new ore deposits, and orders them to go 
to Kuras system. Imperial Mining, Ltd., however, 
always keen to stay ahead of the competition, 
will send out some mercenaries of its own. The 
mercenaries have been instructed to kill any 
explorers from other companies and to find new 
ore deposits. 


Adventure Idea 


While lying over at Lanthrym, the party en- 
counters a grizzled prospector and his small 
scout ship. The man has apparently stumbled on 


NS 
SS 
; ES SS 


gas 
" 


Se 


A 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


SN KS 


anew discovery, an asteroid belt with a few large 
asteroids, laden with mineable ores. 

He wants to go back there, but cannot find 
anyone who is willing to listen to him. He has the 
coordinates on his nav computer, ready to go. 

If the characters take an interest in the man, 
then other people will follow their lead. Many 
people on Lanthrym will not show interest in 
something until someone else shows interest 
first. Once someone shows interest, they ratio- 
nalize, that “someone” must know something the 
rest of the people on Lanthrym do not know. 
Thus, everyone will now want to get involved. 

Crime bosses, mining companies, and the 
Empire will seek to get involved in this affair. It is 
even possible that the old prospector is killed, 
and asks the characters to carry on for his sake. 


Adventure Idea 


An Imperial vessel, preferably a freighter or 
even a small troop carrier, broadcasts a distress 
call. They are in the Kuras system, where they hit 
an asteroid while going through the field. The 
ship managed a crash-landing on Kuras III, but 
they need spare parts for repairs. 

The twist is, the distress signal is garbled, with 
some words missing. Thus, the characters have 
no idea that this is an Imperial ship. Since the 
vessel is broadcasting the distress call on all 
bands and not just Imperial frequencies, there is 
no evidence to link the ship with the Empire. 

There is lots of opportunity for combat as well 


SN 


Kuras Ill NEE jy.» 


as exploration. A suggested twist is for the Impe- 
rial crew to have already made first contact with 
the native species, but, failing to realize that the 
two species are sentient, opened fire on the so- 
called horrible creatures. 

This fact can be divulged to the players or 
withheld. If withheld, it will mean that when 
either the Aganof or the Pulras meet the charac- 
ters, the species may assume the characters are 
also hostile, 

" Imperial opposition should consist of a crew 
of six, and possibly a dozen stormtroopers. And, 
of course, the Empire may have picked up the 
signal and sent its own rescue ship. 


Adventure Idea 


A band of pirates (possibly Dorok’s men, 
Laerron Woern's pirates from Wanted by Cracken, 
or Thalassian slavers from Galaxy Guide 9: Frag- 
ments from the Rim) has discovered Kuras III and 
decided to establish a base of operations on the 


distant world. They selected Kuras II] because it 
is unknown: a perfect secret base location. They 
have also discovered the native species of the 
world and enslaved them. The pirates force the 
sentients to perform hard labor for them, and 
upon discovering the Pulras' shape-shifting abili- 
ties, have begun selling them. 

The characters happen upon the pirate camp 
when they either follow a pirate ship to the 
system, are contracted for a delivery to a pirate 
ship in open space and the ship brings them to 
Kuras, or the characters are captured by the 
pirates and brought here as more slave labor. If 
enslaved, the characters might even learn that 
some Imperial soldiers or citizens have been 
enslaved, and this gives the characters an oppor- 
tunity to work closely with some Imperials — a 
chance to recognize the humanity of the Imperi- 
als or possibly sway the Imperials to the side of 
the Rebellion. The characters have a perfect 
opportunity to incite a slave revolt and teach the 
natives that not all off-worlders are evil. 


94 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three 


== 


ET Sieh TO 
3 A [83 


— 


ta NN ss e. E á ; 


A CAMPAIGN SUPPLEMENT 
FOR SHATTERZONE 


COMING IN SEPTEMBER 1993 


ZW 
ARS 


E TRILOGY 
RCEBOOK 


Planets of the Galaxy 


Volume Three 


Elrood Sector: a little-known backwater far from the raging battles of the 
Galactic Civil War, but still threatened by the merciless forces of the Empire. 


Planets of the Galaxy, Volume Three introduces a whole new sector of space. 
Cross the jungles of Kidron to the High City of Refuge, see the lush farmlands of 
Merisee, check out the starports of Derilyn. 

In this region of strange planets and unusual aliens, intrigue and mysteries abound. 
Only the courageous or lucky survive: could that select group of hardy adventurers— 
include you? 


96-page book features: 


* Six new worlds completely detailed 
with history, cultures, maps, and 
locations. 


* Complete overview of Elrood 
Sector. 

* Detailed biographies of important 
personalities. 

* Detailed information on running a 
campaign in Elrood Sector. 

* New alien species suitable for use 

as gamemaster or player 

characters. 


nm ^ Le 
Om E MN 3 


Ww 
2 


A Supplement for use with Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game 
For ages 12 and up. 


zona ANR ISBN 0-8743)-19b-9 


S UPELE M ENT WI 
0 "18874 40072 7 


WEST 
Waters. 


